UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS 
Urbana and Chicago 



For 

FUMIO 

YOSHIMURA 
introduction to the Illinois Paperback ix 

Introduction to the Touchstone Paperback xv 

Preface xix 

I 

SEXUAL POLITICS T 

ONE 

Instances of Sexual Politics 3 

TWO 

Theory of Sexual Politics 2.3 



II 

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 



59 



THREE 

The Sexual Revolution, First Phase: 

1830— 1930 61 

POLITICAL 61 
POLEMICAL 88 
LITERARY 127 



vm 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



FOUR 

The Counterrevolution: 1920-60 
A. REACTIONARY POLICY 
The Models of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union 

B. THE REACTION IN IDEOLOGY 
Freud and the Influence of Psychoanalytic Thought 
Some Post-Freudians 203 
The Influence of Functionalism 220 



J 57 



157 



176 



INTRODUCTION TO THE 
ILLINOIS PAPERBACK 



III 

THE LITERARY REFLECTION 



235 



FIVE 

D. H. Lawrence 



SIX 



Henry Miller 

SEVEN 

Norman Mailer 

EIGHT 

Jean Genet 

Postscript 

Bibliography 

Acknowledgments 

Index 



2 37 
294 

3M 

336 
362 

364 
378 
383 



It is a great pleasure to me to see a new edition of this work, my first book, back 
in print after an absence of nearly seven years. When a book goes out of print, 
its author feels an erasure, almost as if it had never been published, as if a 
beloved offspring has become one of the "disappeared." While going out of 
print was almost accidental in this title's case, getting it back in print was a big 
problem. I had regained the copyright from Simon and Schuster to bestow it 
on my new editor, Mary Cunane, at W. W. Norton. Simon and Schuster Wad 
been doing little for this book and my other titles, and Norton was such a 
sound academic press that I was sure it would keep Sexual Politics in print. 
Then suddenly, after over twenty years with Norton and as a vice president to 
boot, Mary Cunane simply quit the house. Its other editors were uninterested 
in my work. In a trice, I was without an editor and a publisher. Recovering 
from this state of orphanhood was no easy matter then. The field of feminist 
texts had become dominated by a prodigious number of collections of essays by 
professors of this new discipline who selected one another other's work and 
assigned it for university courses: secondary sources. Primary sources such as 
Sexual Politics were now seen as passe. 

I had the surreal experience of being informed by Doubleday, the origin 
publisher of Sexual Politics, that it was one of the ten most important books it 
had published in its hundred years of existence and the honor of seeing an 



x SEXUAL POLITICS 

excerpt of the book selected for a self-congratulatory coffee-table volume of 
these ten stellar texts- this from the trade division. But from the paperback 
division of Doubleday Anchor, the bad news was that they could not consider 
doing a reprint of the book itself because Sexual Politics was now "not at all 
right" for the "present market in women's studies." The Feminist Press, which 
tends to specialize in texts no longer covered by copyright, would venture to 
reprint Sexual Politics but only a few years hence and only after it had gathered 
a number of "prominent women's studies scholars" to write prefaces and intro- 
ductions vouching for its importance. One imagined these authorities would 
be well remunerated for their efforts. On its first offer, I was to be paid only five 
hundred dollars. 

My "feminist classic" had become a radical text, dubious, "far out," a risky 
proposition. This had an amusing as well as an irritating side as one trade pub- 
lisher or university press after another considered putting the book back into 
print and then backed off. Parts of the text were routinely plagiarized for class 
use without permission; then with the new rules at the copy houses, portions 
were duly reprinted with permission, but you still couldn't get the whole book 
Meanwhile, readers who once couldn't believe that Sexual Politics was actual- 
ly out of print began to realize the book was now unobtainable and grew 
incensed. 

One might account for this quiet type of censorship (I was surely not the 
only one to feel it) through "backlash" or the false rationale of "the market- 
place"-as the vast corporate conglomerates that control American publishing 
explain it to us as they systematically eliminate thought-provoking materials 
from public view. But for me, the long blackout was a grievous period I had 
recovered all my copyrights and wanted several other titles back in print as 
well. Everything I had ever written had vanished from the world except for The 
Politics of Cruelty. These were years of a curious spectral experience of having 
ived beyond my time. Was there any point in writing new books when the ear- 
lier ones were already dead? To continue to write was made harder and more 
uncertain than it need to have been. 

Trying to get back into print was tedious, humiliating, and time consuming 
sapping the energy for new writing. Life was on hold for months and then years 
while one or another editor failed to call back. I held out not only for Sexual 
Politics, my doctoral thesis and first book, but also for the handful of titles that 
were my life's work. Then one day Will Regier, prompted by Kim Grossmann 
ot the University of Illinois Press called up out of the blue and offered to 
reprint the four titles in this series: Sexual Politics, Sita, Flying and The Loony 
Bin Tup. The heavens opened. 

In the thirty years since the composition of Sexual Politics and in the seven 
years it has been out of print, I have had more than enough time to consider 
what I might say in an introduction to a new edition. Three decades have 
brought a great many changes, a great second wave of feminist insurgency in 



INTRODUCTION TO THE ILLINOIS PAPERBACK xi 

this country and throughout the West, but also considerable backlash and reac- 
tion despite a steady wave of patriarchal reform through the United Nations 
responding to international feminism. That would surely be another book— in 
fact, it has been thousands and must go on being so. But in 1970 my main inter- 
est was to restate and reestablish the fact of historical patriarchy in modern 
terms and for my generation, to see it as a controlling political institution built 
on status, temperament, and role, a socially conditioned belief system present- 
ing itself as nature or necessity. Thirty years have focused this understanding 
but could not alter it significantly. Of course there are hindsight perceptions as 
well. Reading Gerda Lerner's magnificent Creation of Patriarchy, published in 
1986, I regretted not having had its fine prose and confident scholarship to 
guide me when I approached the subject. Differing with Lerner, I wish I had 
placed more emphasis on the discovery of paternity as the critical factor in 
establishing the groundwork for patriarchy's triumph over earlier fertility cul- 
ture, as Elizabeth Fischer does. This great early scientific discovery, a hunch I 
shared with friends in discussion but theorists still do not emphasize, has struck 
me more and more over the years as the cause of what Engels called "the great 
historical defeat of woman"— the creation of patriarchy. Engels attributed it to 
the introduction of monogamy. And of course without monogamy and the 
ownership and sequestration of women, paternity is hard to ascertain. But in a 
free sexual culture only maternity is evident: the infant's head in the birth 
canal is visible proof of parenthood, whereas a chance encounter among how 
many others nine months earlier can hardly establish fatherhood and all that 
came with it in the ownership of persons (women, children, and slaves), pri- 
vate property, and the state. In Engels's Victorian imagination, itself a product 
of exploitative patriarchal sexual practices, sexuality was so odious to women 
that he reasoned they would prefer ownership by one man rather than "use" by 
some communal horde. All this implies the existence of an onerous and coer- 
cive sexuality instead of a free one: patriarchy, in fact. But before the establish- 
ment of patriarchy through the discovery of paternity, sexual intercourse might 
have had a very different meaning, a pleasure quite removed from conse- 
quences. 

If paternity was not clear until the example of animal husbandry, with its 
use of breeding pens and sequestration, made the discovery of human paterni- 
ty possible through analogy, the economic potential and social control over 
human birth and issue were not available to human males. Knowledge of 
paternity is the key; until its discovery, the religious and monetary uses of the 
phallus and the seed were also not available. The discovery once made, patri- 
archy could and did invalidate all female participation in the spiritual cre- 
ation of life, nominate the female as a mere vessel in which the magic seed 
grew, invent male gods who gave birth alone to Adam or Athena, and begin 
the long subordination of woman in every avenue of human experience and 
civilization — even to its symbols. The ovum was not discovered until the 



XII 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



nineteenth century, and it appears to have had no such social or political 
significance. 

If the biological discovery of paternity had monumental ramifications for 
human social organization at the onset of patriarchy, today, when that institu- 
lon is under attack and perhaps about to be reformed out of existence, other 
biological discoveries have, perhaps even fortuitously, come into being. In vitro 
fertilization, cloning, and surrogate motherhood -the products of an essential- 
ly masculine science- have made human reproduction subject to human 
manipulation as it has never been previously. It is in the interpretation of scien- 
tific know edge that power lies, and the social consequence of these discoveries 
is still unclear, but control over them is in the hands of a male scientific estab- 
lishment increasingly driven by corporate profit and Western and class inter- 
ests Why not wombs rented from the poor for the rich? As amniocentesis has 
made it possible to chose boy infants over girls, many have done so. The conse- 
quences of knowledge as power may be staggering; the discovery of paternity 
need not have had any social or political effect at all, yet it came to shape the 
iron form of human society in the entire historical period. What uses may be 
made of the new biology, by whom, and for what ends? 

Another perception that hindsight might have emphasized is the role of 
force in patriarchy. When I finished Sexual Politics in 1970, feminists were still 
so intent on a reasonable civil rights argument that it seemed almost "shrill" to 
look very far into domestic violence and rape, which had always been present- 
ed as aberrant" behavior. Only later did we become aware that there was a 
normative element in patriarchal violence, still later we began to understand 
the depth of worldwide poverty among women, even the widespread malnour- 
ishment of female children. The brutality visited on female adolescents that I 
s ud.ed in The Basement was too shocking for me to write about yet; although I 
already knew the story of Sylvia Likens, it was fourteen years before I could put 
°^T, ri E e ^ ,osion of state vio] ence within patriarchy that I studied 

in The Politics of Cruelty took another ten years to understand 

Patriarchy is "in trouble" worldwide; institutions in trouble get tough 
Vicious Patriarchal powers still have the military and financial means' 
Patriarchy is not only male domination of females but also a militaristic hierar- 
chy among males. Many of its concessions in the modern period -a universal 
franchise and representative democracy, rules of war or international law con- 
stitutional and civil rights, individual rights, and human rights -have been 
canceled during this century in the breathtaking creation of concentration 
camps and gulags, the ^introduction of torture on a wide scale, massacres and 
genocide and the use of rape or starvation as policy. The scramble of greed 
presented to us as Darwinian necessity through the "global market" has under- 
mined world labor and the integrity of trade, manufacture, and even medicine 
Human organs are for sale, and the Chinese state can time its executions exact- 
ly to provide vital organs freshly air-expressed for Western hospitals 



INTRODUCTION TO THE ILLINOIS PAPERBACK xiii 

Fundamentalist Christianity constantly thwarts feminism, and fundamen- 
talist Islam has built its entire political program on a new subjection of women. 
Dictatorships return again and again to a more virulent patriarchy. The length 
of patriarchy is its greatest strength, its seeming permanence; its pretensions to 
a divine or natural base have been repeatedly served by religion, pseudo- 
science, or state ambition. Its dangers and oppression are not easily done away 
with. But surely the very future of freedom requires it— not only for women but 
for humanity itself. 

— KateMillett 
New York, 2000 



INTRODUCTION TO THE 
TOUCHSTONE PAPERBACK 



It happened because I got fired. Of course I had a thesis plan, had handed it 
in even before the Columbia strike in '68. I'd been doing the reading for 
years; a whole summer for Lawrence. But what I mean is that this became 
the book it is, even that it became a book at all, taking off with that "to hell 
with it" first chapter, rather than another Ph.D. thesis, because at the end 
of 1968 I was fired from a three-hundred-and-eight-dollar-a-month job as a 
lecturer in English at Barnard College, a job I would have worked at gladly 
the rest of my life. It was my life, at least a third of it; the rest was Fumio 
and my existence as a downtown sculptor— a precarious existence ricocheting 
between the fine arts and scholarship. As a doctoral candidate in literature at 
Columbia I led a double life; during my preliminary examination the fact 
that two of my sculptures had recently appeared in Life magazine was thrown 
up to me as proof I was not a serious scholar. 

I had been serious at Oxford, won first class honors and had been con- 
secrated to the profession. Then I fell in love with sculpture and threw it all 
away, as my colleagues put it, when I resigned my first teaching post to come 
to New York to spend a year in a freezing studio on the Bowery, and headed 
for two years in Japan, living on nothing, sculpting a lot. When I came 
home the only employment for which I qualified was file-clerking, which 
I did, and teaching English, which I could not go on doing without a doc- 
toral degree. By now I was living with the Japanese sculptor Fumio Yoshi- 



xvi SEXUAL POLITICS 

mura; he was getting a dollar and a half an hour in the sweatshops of 
display. One of us had to do better: that meant resigning myself to the doc- 
toral program in English and Comparative Literature at Columbia in order 
to continue devotedly teaching my students at Barnard. I had finished the 
coursework passed the language and qualifying examinations, and outlined 
a thesis. Then came the Columbia strike. I was both a student and a teacher 
as well as a committed feminist, a protestor against the war in Vietnam, and 
a pacifist (the strike revolved around secret government research at Colum- 
bia), so I took the students' part, asking for amnesty for the strikers in order 
that they would not be expelled. The strike transformed Columbia, made it 
wonderful for a time: ideas came alive, faculty debates were hiah drama 
principles were at issue. The academy asserted itself, drew away from gov- 
ernment and business, existed for a while on its own terms. Intellectual val- 
ues became as real as I remembered them at Oxford; more than that, they 
grew into the movielike scenario of revolutionary change. Everything came 
together-the radical agenda of the youth movement, the New Left and 
civil rights, the radical new feminist politics we were inventing downtown- 
all confronting the university's president and trustees, their compromising 
connections with big money and military research. Their power finally as- 
serted itself on that terrible night the police were given the run of the cam- 
pus to beat and bludgeon the university's own young undergraduate students. 
I was there that night and saw it, staying on deliberately past the dancer 
point when the big iron gates closed us in with riot police, to witness what- 
ever harm might come to them-our kids. There were very few faculty mem- 
bers who stayed; a handful of them were young and untenured and vulner- 
able The strike was in May; Nixon was elected in November; Barnard fired 
me before Christmas. In the whirlwind I heard that the other instructors, 
young men from Columbia, were gone too. 

Life stopped. I drank martinis in the daytime and wept. We'd starve we'd 
die. Furmo grinned and listened to me rave. Columbia's gates were shut 
now; I was outside the walls of academe forever; I had lost my profession. 
But I could still write that damn thesis. So I did. The whole world was 
ahead of me and I didn't know it. But in the desert of time around that 
holiday season and into the new year I toiled over what became chapter 
two, the 'Theory of Sexual Politics." Tried a little version of it out in a 
speech at Cornell, wore my best jumper and a silk blouse and even got paid 
seventy-five dollars. Driving back into the city of New York over the George 
Washington Bridge, I had a panic attack and confessed to my comrades that 
I had lost my job. 

I was now on my own. Fumio went off to paint Persian miniatures bv the 
hour I had the whole day ahead of me, so I started to play, to work at writ- 
ing the way I d made sculpture, for fun. At the end of a week I had a rough 
draft of chapter one, exemplary quotations of sexual intercourse with com- 



INTRODUCTION TO THE TOUCHSTONE PAPERBACK xvii 

mentary, and read it to our pal Jim Wagenvoord, a young writer who stopped 
by for a drink that Friday evening. He laughed his head off. So did Fumio. 
With this encouragement I called up Betty Prashker at Doubleday, who had 
politely refused to publish the little pamphlet I wrote with the education 
committee of NOW, but had offered to read whatever I wrote next. She did. 
She liked the first chapter and offered me an advance of four thousand 
dollars. 

Now it remained to find someone at Columbia who would direct such a 
thesis. The professor assigned to me declined and moved on to Harvard. I 
went after Steven Marcus: marshaling my outrageous attack on patriarchy 
into a semblance of academic respectability, I waited for him in the hall and 
hoped he'd listen. He did. The book holds water, thanks not only to his in- 
tellectual courage but to his dogged insistence upon proof and more proof, 
exhaustive reading, research, and analysis. He raised the argument above 
feminist rhetoric into the kind of cultural criticism it aimed for and hoped 
to help invent. Betty Prashker was an editor who really worked on a text. I 
was an angry young woman with a message, a graduate student who wanted 
to be a scholar, a sculptor who wanted to learn to write. They taught me by 
being tough and patient and exacting; the book owes them both a great debt. 

It is dedicated to Fumio, and the nightly martini over which he listened 
to each day's pages, laughed and crowed, criticized, and egged me on. Sexual 
Politics also owes a great deal to a long- vanished debating society called 
Downtown Radical Women, where each detail of the theory of patriarchy 
was hatched, rehearsed, and refined upon again; to friends in New Haven, 
graduate women at Yale, who would stay up nights speculating on the ori- 
gins of patriarchy, the discovery of paternity, the population explosion fol- 
lowing upon the implementation of that discovery in the rise of slavery, 
property, and the city-state. Sexual politics, the idea, was an ongoing project 
among a great many women in the months I was writing it. And I had their 
support and companionship, their intellectual energy running through me so 
actively I felt I composed it for all of us, was the scribe of many. Without 
Lucinda Cisler's amazing bibliography to draw upon, I couldn't have located 
many of my sources. Other books were emerging at the same time too: Robin 
Morgan's Sisterhood Is Powerful, Shulamith Firestone's Dialectic of Sex, 
all the pamphlets that were collected together into the Notes from the First 
Year. We were all in this together, knew each other, were collaborators in 
the creation of a different consciousness. 

There was Columbia Women's Liberation too, founded with friends in 
the graduate school and faculty; we devoted hundreds of hours of research 
to documenting the university's unfair salary schedules, deliberately using 
the tools of our academic training to attack the system. We were dedicated 
to scholarship, loved it, believed in it so much that we dreamed about it out 
loud, lying on someone's rug uptown and outlining a curriculum freed of 



XV111 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



sexual prejudice, a whole new way to see history, literature, economics, psy- 
chology, political events. We were beginning to invent women's studies, we 
were reinterpreting knowledge, discovering a new learning. 

These were the days of the millennium. As the book took shape, so did 
events. By the time Sexual Politics was published, our actions and demon- 
strations, meetings, issues, were running through this and other countries, 
mobilizing women. By the summer of 1970, the moment this text was re- 
leased, there was a great wave of feminism building. It was the fiftieth an- 
niversary of the suffrage, there were marches and strikes of women workers 
in New York and throughout the United States. It was the right moment. 
The rest is history. 

And the history of the emancipation of women is-like other stories 
that describe the long, difficult winding down of oppressive systems-cir- 
cular; a little forward, almost as much backward, then standstill, reaction, 
repression, then another surge. We have seen the Equal Rights Amend- 
ment almost pass and then be defeated again, abortion won and then nearly 
lost-a woman's right to choose whether to have a child or not, become once 
again something men quibble over. So we know it's a long haul, the oldest 
struggle; we know that as feminists now we stand at one still vital ringing 
moment in a file of years stretching behind us and before us. Failure is im- 
possible: Susan B. Anthony said it for us. If it isn't easy, it's always interest- 
ing. And the work of enlarging human freedom is such nice work we're 
lucky to get it. 



-Kate Millett 
New York, 1990 



PREFACE 



Before the reader is shunted through the relatively uncharted, often even 
hypothetical territory which lies before him, it is perhaps only fair he be 
equipped with some general notion of the terrain. The first part of this essay 
is devoted to the proposition that sex has a frequently neglected political 
aspect. I have attempted to illustrate this first of all by giving attention to the 
role which concepts of power and domination play in some contemporary 
literary descriptions of sexual activity itself. These random examples are 
followed by a chapter analyzing the social relationship between the sexes 
from a theoretical standpoint. This second chapter, in my opinion the most 
important in the book and far and away the most difficult to write, attempts 
to formulate a systematic overview of patriarchy as a political institution. 
Much here, and throughout the book, is tentative, and in its zeal to present 
a consistent argument has omitted (although it need not preclude) the more 
familiar ambiguities and contradictions of our social arrangements. 

The second section, chapters three and four, are largely historical, out- 
lining the great transformation in the traditional relationship between the 
sexes which took place in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and 
then giving an account of the climate of reaction which later set in, assuring 
the continuation of a modified patriarchal way of life, and frustrating the 
possibility of revolutionary social change in this area for some three decades. 
The later chapters of the book focus specifically upon the work of three 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



figures I take to be representative of this latter period, examining their re- 
sponses to the prospect of radical changes in sexual politics and their partici- 
pation in a mood of reaction against such an impulse. The final chapter, 
devoted to the writings of Jean Genet, is intended to present a contrast, first 
in approaching sexual hierarchy from the oblique angle of homosexual 
dominance order as Genet describes and exposes it in his novels, and sec- 
ondly, through the emphasis given in his plays to the theme of sexual 
oppression and the necessity, in any radical program, for its eradication. 

It has been my conviction that the adventure of literary criticism is not 
restricted to a dutiful round of adulation, but is capable of seizing upon 
the larger insights which literature affords into the life it describes, or in- 
terprets, or even distorts. This essay, composed of equal parts of literary and 
cultural criticism, is something of an anomaly, a hybrid, possibly a new 
mutation altogether. I have operated on the premise that there is room for 
a criticism which takes into account the larger cultural context in which 
literature is conceived and produced. Criticism which originates from literary 
history is too limited in scope to do this; criticism which originates in aes- 
thetic considerations, "New Criticism," never wished to do so. 

I have also found it reasonable to take an author's ideas seriously when, 
like the novelists covered in this study, they wish to be taken seriously or 
not at all. Where I have substantive quarrels with some of these ideas, I 
prefer to argue on those very grounds, rather than to take cover under the 
tricks of the trade and mask disagreement with "sympathetic readings" or 
the still more dishonest pretense that the artist is "without skill" or a "poor 
technician." Critics who disagree with Lawrence, for example, about any 
issue are fond of saying that his prose is awkward— a judgment purely 
subjective. It strikes me as better to make a radical investigation which can 
demonstrate why Lawrence's analysis of a situation is inadequate, or biased, 
or his influence pernicious, without ever needing to imply that he is less than 
a great and original artist, and in many respects a man of distinguished moral 
and intellectual integrity. 

The ambitious, often rather overwhelming, undertaking this study became 
as I proceeded, could not have been accomplished without the guidance, the 
support, and the much-needed criticism of a number of people: I should 
like to thank George Stade, Theodore Solataroff, Betty Prashker, Annette 
Baxter, Mary MothersiU, Lila Karp, Suzanne Shad-Somers, Catherine 
Stimpson, Richard Gustafson, Laurie Stone, Frances Kamm, and Sylvia Alex- 
ander for providing all of them. I am particularly grateful to Steven Marcus 
who gave the manuscript the most careful reading and could always find 
time and patience to insist rhetoric give way to reason. 



I 



SEXUAL 
"POLITICS 



-Kate Millett 
New York, 1^70 



ONE 



Instances of Sexual Politics 



i 

I would ask her to prepare the bath for me. She would pretend to demur but 
she would do it just the same. One day, while I was seated in the tub soaping 
myself, I noticed that she had forgotten the towels. "Ida," I called, "bring me 
some towels!" She walked into the bathroom and handed me them. She had on 
a silk bathrobe and a pair of silk hose. As she stooped over the tub to put the 
towels on the rack her bathrobe slid open. I slid to my knees and buried my head 
in her muff. It happened so quickly that she didn't have time to rebel or even 
to pretend to rebel. In a moment I had her in the tub, stockings and all. I slipped 
the bathrobe off and threw it on the floor. I left the stockings on— it made her 
more lascivious looking, more the Cranach type. I lay back and pulled her on 
top of me. She was just like a bitch in heat, biting me all over, panting, gasping, 
wriggling like a worm on the hook. As we were drying ourselves, she bent over 
and began nibbling at my prick. I sat on the edge of the tub and she kneeled 
at my feet gobbling it. After a while I made her stand up, bend over; then I let 
her have it from the rear. She had a small juicy cunt, which fitted me like a 
glove. I bit the nape of her neck, the lobes of her ears, the sensitive spot on her 
shoulder, and as I pulled away I left the mark of my teeth on her beautiful 
white ass. Not a word spoken. 1 

This colorful descriptive prose is taken from Henry Miller's celebrated Sexus, 
first published in Paris in the forties but outlawed from the sanitary shores 

1 Henry Miller, Sexus (New York: Grove Press, 1965), p. 180. 



4 SEXUAL POLITICS 

of his native America until the Grove Press edition of 1965. Miller, alias 
Val, is recounting his seduction of Ida Verlaine, the wife of his friend Bill 
Woodruff. As an account of sexual passage, the excerpt has much in it of note 
beyond that merely biological activity which the narrator would call "fuck- 
ing." Indeed, it is just this other content which gives the representation of 
the incident its value and character. 

First, one must consider the circumstances and the context of the scene. 
Val has just met Bill Woodruff outside a burlesque theater where Ida Ver- 
laine is performing. In the rambling fashion of Miller's narrative, this meet- 
ing calls up the memory of the hero's sexual bouts with Ida ten years before, 
whereupon follow eleven pages of vivid re-enactment. First, there is Ida her- 
self: 

She was just exactly the way her name sounded— pretty, vain, theatrical, faith- 
less, spoiled, pampered, petted. Beautiful as a Dresden doll, only she had raven 
tresses and a Javanese slant to her soul. If she had a soul at all! Lived entirely 
in the body, in her senses, her desires— and she directed the show, the body 
show, with her tyrannical little will which poor Woodruff translated as some 
monumental force of character. ... Ida swallowed everything like a pythoness. 
She was heardess and insatiable. 2 

Woodruff himself is given out as a uxorious fool: "The more he did for her 
the less she cared for him. She was a monster from head to toe." 3 The nar- 
rator claims to be utterly immune to Ida's power but is nonetheless subject 
to coldly speculative curiosity: 

I just didn't give a fuck for her, as a person, though I often wondered what 
she might be like as a piece of fuck, so to speak. I wondered about it in a de- 
tached way, but somehow it got across to her, got under her skin.* 

As a friend of the family, Val is entided to spend the night at the Wood- 
ruff house, followed by breakfast in bed while husband Bill goes off to work. 
Val's initial tactic of extracting service from Ida is important to the events 
which follow: 



She hated the thought of waiting on me in bed. She didn't do it for her husband 
and she couldn't see why she should do it for me. To take breakfast in bed was 
something I never did except at Woodruff's place. I did it expressly to annoy 
and humiliate her," 

In accord with one of the myths at the very heart of a Miller novel, the 
protagonist, who is always some version of the author himself, is sexually 

2 Ibid., p. 178. 

3 Ibid. 

i lbid., p. 179. 

6 Ibid. 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 5 

irresistible and potent to an almost mystical degree. It is therefore no very 
great surprise to the reader that Ida falls into his hands. To return to the 
plucking then, and the passage quoted at length above. The whole scene 
reads very much like a series of strategems, aggressive on the part of the hero 
and acquiescent on the part of what custom forces us to designate as the 
heroine of the episode. His first maneuver, for example, is to coerce further 
service in the form of a demand for towels, which reduces Ida to the appropri- 
ate roles of a hostess and a domestic. That Ida has dressed herself in a col- 
lapsible bathrobe and silk stockings is not only accommodating but almost 
romancelike. The female reader may realize that one rarely wears stockings 
without the assistance of other paraphernalia, girdle or garters, but classic 
masculine fantasy dictates that nudity's most appropriate exception is some 
gauzelike material, be it hosiery or underwear. 

Val makes the first move: "I slid to my knees and buried my head in her 
muff." The locution "muff" is significant because it is a clue to the reader 
that the putative humility of the action and the stance of petition it implies 
are not to be taken at face value. "Muff" carries the tone, implicit in the 
whole passage, of one male relating an exploit to another male in the mascu- 
line vocabulary and with its point of view. Considerably more revealing 
as to the actual character of the action is the comment which follows: 
"It happened so quickly she didn't have time to rebel or even to pretend to 
rebel." Since the entire scene is a description not so much of sexual inter- 
course, but rather of intercourse in the service of power, "rebel" is a highly 
charged word. Val had already informed the reader that "she wanted to bring 
me under her spell, make me walk the tight-rope, as she had done with Wood- 
ruff and her other suitors." The issue, of course, is which of the two is to walk 
a tight-rope, who shall be master? 

Having immediately placed Ida under his domination, Val acts fast to 
forestall insubordination. This prompts the next remarkable event— Val 
brings her into his element, as it were, and places her in the distinctly ridicu- 
lous position of being in a bathtub with her clothes on. Again the language 
indicates the underlying issue of power: "I had her in the bathtub." The 
reader is also advised that credit should be given the narrator for his speed 
and agility; Ida is swooshed into the tub in a trice. Having assumed all initi- 
ative, Val then proceeds to divest his prey of her redundant bathrobe and 
throw it on the floor. 

The display of stockings and nudity is brought forward for aesthetic delec- 
tation; it contributes to make Ida "more lascivious looking, more the Cranach 
type." The frail perfection of a Cranach nude had been mentioned earlier as 
Ida's comparable body type. Juxtaposing the innocence and rarity of this 
image with the traditional "girlie" figure in silk stockings is an eminent bit 
of strategy. The word 'lascivious" implies a deliberate sensuality and is de- 
pendent upon a relish for the prurient, and particularly for the degrading 
in sexual activity, which, in its rum, relies on the distinctly puritanical con- 



6 SEXUAL POLITICS 

viction that sexuality is indeed dirty and faindy ridiculous. Webster defines 
'lascivious" as "wanton; lewd; lustful" or a "tendency to produce lewd emo- 
tions." The Cranach in question is most likely to be the delicate and iathei 
morbid Eve of the Genesis Panel, now depreciated to a calendar girl. 

Val proceeds— his manner coolly self-assured and redolent of comfort: "I 
lay back and pulled her on top of me." What follows is purely subjective de- 
scription. Ceasing to admire himself, the hero is now lost in wonder at his 
effects. For the fireworks which ensue are Ida's, though produced by a 
Pavlovian mechanism. Like the famous programed dog, in fact "just like a 
bitch in heat," Ida responds to the protagonist's skillful manipulation: 
". . . biting me all over, panting, gasping, wriggling like a worm on the 
hook." No evidence is ever offered to the reader of any such animal-like fail- 
ure of self-restraint in the response of our hero. It is he who is the hook, and 
she who is the worm: the implication is clearly one of steely self-composure 
contrasted to loverlike servility and larval vulnerability. Ida has— in the 
double, but related, meaning of the phrase— been had. 

In the conventional order of this genre of sexual narrative, one position 
of intercourse must rapidly be followed by another less orthodox and there- 
fore of greater interest. Miller obliges the reader with a quick instance of 
dorsal intercourse, preceded by a flitting interlude of fellatio. But more per- 
tinent to the larger issues under investigation is the information that Ida is 
now so "hooked" that it is she who makes the first move: ". . . she bent over 
and began nibbling at my prick." The hero's "prick," now very center stage, 
is still a hook and Ida metamorphosed into a very gullible fish. (Perhaps all 
of this aquatic imagery was inspired by the bathtub.) 

Furthermore, positions are significandy reversed: "I sat on the edge of the 
tub and she kneeled at my feet gobbling it." The power nexus is clearly out- 
lined. It remains only for the hero to assert his victory by the arrogance of 
his final gesture: "After a while I made her stand up, bend over; then I let 
her have it from the rear." 

What the reader is vicariously experiencing at this juncture is a nearly 
supernatural sense of power— should the reader be a male. For the passage 
is not only a vivacious and imaginative use of circumstance, detail, and con- 
text to evoke the excitations of sexual intercourse, it is also a male assertion 
of dominance over a weak, compliant, and rather unintelligent female. It is 
a case of sexual politics at the fundamental level of copulation. Several satis- 
factions for the hero and reader alike undoubtedly accrue upon this triumph 
of the male ego, the most tangible one being communicated in the following: 
"She had a small juicy cunt which fitted me like a glove." 

The hero then caters to the reader's appetite in telling how he fed upon 
his object, biting ". . . the nape of her neck, the lobes of her ears, the sensi- 
tive spot on her shoulder, and as I pulled away I left the mark of my teeth 
on her beautiful white ass." The last bite is almost a mark of patent to denote 
possession and use, but further still, to indicate attitude. Val had previously 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 7 

informed us that Bill Woodruff was so absurd and doting a groveler that he 
had demeaned himself to kiss this part of his wife's anatomy. Our hero re- 
adjusts the relation of the sexes by what he believes is a more normative ges- 
ture. 

Without question the most telling statement in the narrative is its last sen- 
tence: "Not a word spoken." Like the folk hero who never condescended 
to take off his hat, Val has accomplished the entire campaign, including its 
coup de grace, without stooping to one word of human communication. The 
recollection of the affair continues for several more pages of diversified stimu- 
lation by which the hero now moves to consolidate his position of power 
through a series of physical and emotional gestures of contempt. In answer 
to her question " 'You don't really like me, do you?' " he replies with 
studied insolence, " 'I like this,' said I, giving her a stiff jab." 6 His penis is 
now an instrument of chastisement, whereas Ida's genitalia are but the means 
of her humiliation: "I like your cunt, Ida . . . it's the best thing about you." 7 

All further representations conspire to convince the reader of Val's superior 
intelligence and control, while demonstrating the female's moronic complai- 
sance and helpless carnality; each moment exalts him further and degrades 
her lower; a dazzling instance of the sexual double standard: 

"You never wear any undies do you? You're a slut, do you know it?" 

I pulled her dress up and made her sit that way wbile I finished my coffee. 

"Play with it a bit while I finish this." 

'You're filthy," she cried, but she did as I told her. 

"Take your two fingers and open it up. I like the color of it." 

. . . With this I reached for a candle on the dresser at my side and I handed it 

to her. 
"Let's see if you can get it in all the way . . ." 
"You can make me do anything, you dirty devil." 
"You like it, don't you/' 8 

Val's imperious attitude sets the tone for the dramatic events which follow, 
and the writing soars off into that species of fantasy which Steven Marcus 
calls "pornotopic," a shower of orgasms: 

I laid her on a small table and when she was on the verge of exploding I picked 
her up and walked around the room with her; then I took it out and made her 
walk on her hands holding her by the thighs, letting it slip out now and then to 
excite her still more. 9 



In both the foregoing selections the most operative verbal phrases are: "I 
laid her on a small table" (itself a pun), "made her walk on her hands," "she 

6 Ibid., ?. 181. 
i Ibid. 

s lbid., pp. 181-82. 
9 Ibid., p. 183. 



8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



did as I told her," and "I pulled her dress up and made her sit that way." Ida 
is putty, even less substantial than common clay, and like a bullied child, is 
continually taking orders for activity which in the hero's view degrades her 
while it aggrandizes him. 

Meanwhile, the hero's potency is so superb and overwhelming that he is 
lost in admiration: "It went on like this until I had such an erection that even 
after I shot a wad into her it stayed up like a hammer. That excited her ter- 
ribly." 10 And emerging from his efforts covered with so much credit and 
satisfaction, he takes account of his assets: "My cock looked like a bruised 
rubber hose; it hung between my legs, extended an inch or two beyond its 
normal length and swollen beyond recognition." 11 

Ida, who has never demanded much of his attention, nor of ours, is quickly 
forgotten as the hero goes off to feast in his inimitable fashion: "I went to the 
drug store and swallowed a couple of malted milks." 12 His final pronounce- 
ment on his adventure also redounds to his credit: "A royal bit of fucking, 
thought I to myself, wondering how I'd act when I met Woodruff again." 13 
Royal indeed. 

During the course of the episode, Val obliges the reader wfth intelligence 
of the Woodruffs' marital incompatibility, a misalliance of a curiously physi- 
cal character. Mr. Woodruff possesses a genital organ of extraordinary pro- 
portions, "a veritable horse cock." "I remember the first time I saw it— I could 
scarcely believe my eyes" 14 whereas Mrs. Woodruff's dimensions have al- 
ready been referred to under the rubric "small juicy cunt." But lest this 
irreconcilable misfortune in any way excuse her in seeking out other satisfac- 
tion, it is repeatedly underlined, throughout the section of the novel where 
she figures that she is an uppity woman. Therefore the hero's exemplary be- 
havior in reducing her to the status of a mere female. Moreover, we are given 
to understand that she is an insatiable nymphomaniac— thus his wit and pros- 
perity in discovering and exploiting her. 



The figure of Ida Verlaine appears to have haunted Miller's imagination. 
It is not enough that his hero should discover her "whorish" nature and bring 
her to paroxysms of sensual capitulation while congratulating himself on 
cuckolding her adulating husband. In an earlier work, Black Spring, she 
appears as a woman discovered at prostitution and properly chastised. Here 
Miller's didactic nature obtrudes itself and one is made to perceive the valid- 
ity of his claim that his is a deeply moral imagination. 

Bill Woodruff's brilliant reaction when the news is passed along to him 

» Ibid., pp. 182-83. 

^Ibid., p. 183. 

VIbid. 

™Tbid. 

i*lbid., p. 184. 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 9 

by another buddy is narrated at length and with obvious relish. The nar- 
rator, again a version of Miller, regards the anecdote as "cute": 

This night, however, he waited up for her and when she came sailing in, chip- 
per, perky, a little lit up and cold as usual he pulled up short with a "where 
were you to-night?" She tried pulling her usual yam, of course. "Cut that," he 
said. "I want you to get your things off and tumble into bed," That made her 
sore. She mentioned in her roundabout way that she didn't want any of that 
business. "You don't feel in the mood for it, I suppose," says he, and then he 
adds; "that's fine because now I'm going to warm you up a bit," With that he 
up and ties her to the bedstead, gags her, and then goes for the razor strop. On 
the way to the bathroom, he grabs a bottle of mustard from the kitchen. He 
comes back with the razor strop and he belts the piss out of her. And after that 
he rubs the mustard into the raw welts. "That ought to keep you warm for 
to-night," he says. And so saying he makes her bend over and spread her legs 
apart. "Now," he says, "I'm going to pay you as usual," and taking a bill out of 
his pocket he crumples it and then shoves it up her quim. 1B 

Miller concludes the saga of Ida and Bill with a last joke at the cuckold's 
expense, for Bill is still a cuckold, and a maxim for the reader in capital let- 
ters, is put forward as "the purpose of all this"— merely "To prove that 

THE GREAT ARTIST IS HE WHO CONQUERS THE ROMANTIC 

IN HIMSELF." 16 

Miller's educational intentions in the passage aie abundantly clear. Females 
who are frigid, e.g., not sexually compliant, should be beaten. Females 
who break the laws of marital fidelity should also be beaten, for the barter 
system of marriage (sex in return for security) must not be violated by out- 
side commerce. Rather more informative than this sober doctrine of the cave 
is the insight it provides into Miller's sexual/literary motives and their un- 
deniably sadistic overtones. They are closer to the vicarious politic of the 
cock-pit than of the boudoir, but the former often casts considerable light 
on the latter. 



II 

"I have nothing in me," she said. "Do we go ahead?" 
"Who knows," I said, "keep quiet." 

And I could feel her beginning to come. The doubt in me had tipped her off, 
the adjuration to be quiet had thrown the bolt. She was a minute away, but 
she was on her way, and just as if one of her wily fingers had thrown some 
switch in me, I was gone like a bat and shaking hands with the Devil once more. 
Rare greed shone in her eyes, pleasure in her mouth, she was happy. I was 
ready to chase, I was gorged to throw the first spill, high on a choice, like some 

is Henry Miller, Block Spring (1938) (New York: Grove Press, 1963). PP- 227-28. 
" Ibid., p. 228. 



io SEXUAL POLITICS 

cat caught on two wires I was leaping back and forth, in separate runs for sep- 
arate strokes, bringing spoils and secrets up to the Lord from the red mills, 
bearing messages of defeat back from that sad womb, and then I chose— ah, 
but there was time to change— I chose her cunt. It was no graveyard now, no 
warehouse, no, more like a chapel now, a modest decent place, but its walls 
were snug, its odor was green, there was a sweetness in the chapel, a muted 
reverential sweetness in those walls of stone. "That is what prison will be like 
for you," said a last effort of my inner tongue. "Stay here!" came a command 
from inside of me; except that I could feel the Devil's meal beneath, its fires 
were lifting through the floor, and I waited for the warmth to reach inside, to 
come up from the cellar below, to bring booze and heat up and licking tongues, 
I was up above a choice which would take me on one wind or another, and I 
had to give myself, I could not hold back, there was an explosion, furious, 
treacherous and hot as the gates of an icy slalom with the speed at my heels 
overtaking my nose. I had one of those splittings of a second where the senses 
fly out and there in that instant the itch reached into me and drew me out and 
I jammed up her ass and came as if I'd been flung across the room. She let out 
a cry of rage. 17 

The foregoing is a description of heterosexual sodomy from Norman 
Mailer's An American Dream. The practice is not only one of the book's pri- 
mary attractions, but so central to the action that one might even say the 
plot depended on it. Mailer's hero, Stephen Rojack, has just finished mur- 
dering his wife and is now relieving his feelings by buggering his maid. 

Mailer transparently identifies with his hero, who has little motive for the 
killing beyond the fact that he is unable to "master" his mate by any means 
short of murder. The desire for such mastery is perfectly understandable to 
Mailer and even engages his sympathy. So does Rojack's surprisingly old- 
fashioned stance of the outraged husband. Mrs. Rojack, to whom Mr. 
Rojack's many affairs are perfectly well known, has found the temerity to 
advise him that since their separation she too has indulged herself. Moreover, 
and here is where one must depend on the forceful role of sodomy in the 
book, she admits that she has been enjoying this very activity with her new 
lovers. Now sodomy is a specialty in which our hero takes personal pride. 
Though he boasts to her face that his mistresses far excel her in this activity, 
the notion that his wife is committing sodomous adultery is evidently too 
severe a trial on his patience. It is the final blow to his vanity, his sense of 
property, and most material of all, his fancied masculine birthright of su- 
perordination, so he promptly retaliates by strangling the upstart. As Mrs. 
Rojack is one of those Celtic sporting women, it is not easy work, and Rojack 
is exhausted when he finishes and all the more triumphant: "I was weary 
with a most honorable fatigue, and my flesh seemed new. I had not felt so 

17 Norman Mailer, An American Dream (New York, Dial, ^64), pp. 45-46. 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 11 

nice since I was twelve. It seemed inconceivable at this instant that anything 
in life could fail to please." 18 

To return to the maid. Rojack had entered her room to find her busily 
masturbating, surely a fortuitous circumstance. The rest is easy. He calmly 
removes her hand from her genitals and replaces it with his bare foot 
"drawing up on the instant out of her a wet spicy wisdom of all the 
arts and crafts of getting along in the world." 19 The comment is indicative 
of the heavy heuristic value which the hero is to obtain from his sexual ex- 
ploits. For an instant Rojack toys with the idea of simply murdering the 
maid— "I was ready to kill her easy as not, there was an agreeable balance in 
the thought that I was ready to kill anyone at this moment" 20 — but he 
decides instead to take her on. Three pages of sexual activity then follow be- 
fore a word is spoken; and, as the hero boasts, "it must have been five min- 
utes before I chose to give her a kiss, but I took her mouth at last" 21 In 
doing so, he undertakes to absorb her soul, which is that of a German prole- 
tarian. It appears that Mr. Rojack's employee smells, and it is chiefly through 
her odor that Rojack, a Harvard man, a college professor, a United States 
congressman, a television personality, and the very recent widower of a rich 
woman, stumbles upon the understanding oudined in the next statement. 

But then, as abrupdy as an arrest, a thin high constipated smell (a smell which 
spoke of rocks and grease and the sewer-damp of wet stones in poor European 
alleys) came needling its way out of her. She was hungry, like a lean rat she was 
hungry, and it could have spoiled my pleasure except that there was something 
intoxicating in the sheer narrow pitch of the smell, so strong, so stubborn, so 
private, it was a smell which could be mellowed only by the gift of furs and 
gems, 22 

Although her patron, Rojack is almost too repelled to continue: "it could 
have spoiled my pleasure." Then he decides that even this unworthy creature 
can serve him in some way: "I had a desire suddenly to skip the sea and mine 
the earth, a pure prong of desire to bugger, there was canny hard-packed evil 
in that butt, that I knew." 23 

It is at this point that the first word is spoken; the servant resists the will 
of her master. But Ruta's "verhoten" makes little impression on Rojack. He 
has convinced himself that her essence lies in her rectum and that it is a 
quality which might be convenient to him. As a newly arrived homicide, he 
is in immediate need of a bit of that canny lower-class self-preservation Ruta 
is presumed to contain. For if nothing else, she has the invaluable "knowledge 

wibid., p. 32,. 
"Ifc«J., p. 42. 
2» Ibid. 

21 ft«*v PP- 41-43- 

22 Ibid., p. 43. 
2s lbid., p. 44. 



i2 SEXIML POLITICS 

of a city rat." Furthermore, Rojack regards himself in the light of a moralist 
in search of wisdom and Ruta's anus can teach him about evil. 

How evil resides in her bowels or why Ruta has a greater share of it than 
her master may appear difficult to explain, but many uncanny things are 
possible with our author. In most of Mailer's fiction sexuality has such a 
mystical and metaphysical import that genitals acquire definite personalities. 
Ruta's "box," as Rojack refers to it, has very little to offer; nothing resides 
therein but "cold gasses from the womb and a storehouse of disappoint- 
ments." 24 In An American Dream female sexuality is depersonalized to the 
point of being a matter of class or a matter of nature, Ruta behaves like a 
guttersnipe, Deborah, the former Mrs. Rojack, like a cruel duchess. Cherry, 
the mistress Rojack later wins, has the virtues of nature, unavailable to poor 
Ruta, and excelling those of the privileged female (Deborah) who is now 
too dangerously insubordinate to stay alive. As the hero and a male, Rojack, 
of course, transcends any such typology. 

Finding where Ruta's true serviceability lies, the hero disdains her vagina 
to continue rooting in her nether orifice. (Her name appears to be a cruel 
English pun on this: in German, Rute, pronounced nearly the same as Ruta, 
refers both to the switch or birch of chastisement as well as to the penis, and 
perhaps more than mere linguistic coincidence is involved.) As her resistance 
renders her difficult to penetrate, Rojack hits upon the device of pulling her 
hair, noting with fastidious justification that, anyway, it is dyed red: "I could 
feel the pain in her scalp strain like a crowbar the length of her body and 
push up the trap and I was in, that quarter-inch more was gained, the rest 
was easy." 25 As further justification for his inquiry into her he resorts again 
to the odor of her presumably vicious, but now fascinating, character: 

What a subtle smell came from her then, something back of the ambition, the 
narrow stubbornness, the monomaniacal determination to get along in the world, 
no, that was replaced by something tender as the 8esh but not as clean, some- 
thing sneaky, full of fear. 2C 

Just as homicide produced an honorable fatigue in him, Rojack now hits 
on the glittering idea that in forcibly buggering his servant he is actually 
performing an act of patriotism because Ruta is a "Nazi." The reader may 
have some difficulty in accepting this; twenty-three years old and therefore a 
child during the war, Ruta is hardly a fit subject for Rojack's instant justice. 
But the hero continues to take an uncommon satisfaction in his racial re- 
venge: "There was a high private pleasure in plugging a Nazi, there was 
something clean despite all— I felt as if I were gliding in the clear air above 

M»iA,p.44. 
25 Ibid. 

™Ibid. 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS I3 

Luther's jakes." 27 And through this shift, Rojack, a wizard at manipulative 
ethics, arrives at a position of moral leverage for any further exploits. 

Sodomy has a number of possible meanings in Rojack's mind: homosexu- 
ality (he confesses to Cherry that he has some doubts about his heterosexual 
vocation); a forbidden species of sexuality at which he is an expert and over 
which he holds copyright; or anal rape, which is his way of expressing con- 
temptuous mastery. It is the acting out of this last attitude which is reserved 
for Ruta. 

Throughout the rest of the passage, Rojack entertains the reader with his 
contrasting impressions of Ruta's rectum, "a bank of pleasures," and her 
vagina, "a deserted warehouse, that empty tomb." But this virtuosity is ac- 
complished with certain misgivings. As one might expect, these have nothing 
to do with her pleasure, which is never at issue, but with Rojack's peculiar 
notion of sexual honor. After all, he muses, her womb might contain "one 
poor flower growing in a gallery." Because he has deprived her of the oppor- 
tunity to bear his seed, a substance Rojack regards with reverential awe, 
he feels obliged to regard himself as a "great thief." 28 Later he will indulge 
in a number of "might have beens" about the ill fortune of "that empty 
womb," that "graveyard which gambled a flower and lost." 20 The fact that 
his precious semen has been discharged in her rectum and not in her cervix 
is a source of bemusement, not uncomfortably experienced as guilt. Ruta 
has missed the radiant opportunity to be impregnated by a higher power 
and he can only pity her: "I had thought then of what had been left in her. 
It was perishing in the kitchens of the Devil." And then he wonders; "Was 
its curse on me? . . . Was that the cloud of oppression which had come to 
me in the dark? That the seed was expiring in the wrong field?" 30 Perhaps 
it is this monomania about his own sexual discharge that has made Rojack a 
specialist in existential dread. 

As for Ruta, she responds magically, just as the relevant masculine fantasy 
dictates. Indeed, her gratitude at being sodomized is positively astonishing: 
"I do not know why you have trouble with your wife. You are absolutely a 
genius, Mr. Rojack," 81 Accordingly, the final stages in which this man has 
his will with his maid take place under the most ideal conditions. Ruta 
now responds quite as masculine egotism would prescribe: ". . . she was 
becoming mine as no woman ever had, she wanted to be part of my will." 32 
It would seem that she could want nothing better for herself, and at once 
her "feminine," or again "true woman," instincts emerge and she acquires 



27 Ibid. 






z*ibid., 

2» Ibid., 

wibid. 


p- 
p- 


45- 
49- 


31 Ibid., 

wibid., 


p- 

p- 


46. 

45- 



1 1 I 



'4 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



what her master relays to be ". . . the taste of power in her eyes and her 
mouth, that woman's look that the world is theirs." 33 This delusion of success 
is, of course, most advantageous to her lord's purposes. 

Sexual congress in a Mailer novel is always a matter of strenuous en- 
deavor, rather like mountain climbing— a straining ever upward after achieve- 
ment. In this, as in so many ways, Mailer is authentically American. Rojaclc 
is presently doing very well at his cliff-face, but Ruta begins to waver. She 
turns with guilty admission of possible failure, "a little look of woe was on 
her face, a puckered fearful little nine-year-old afraid of her punishment, 
wishing to be good." 3,1 In his vast composure, Rojack orders her to "keep 
quiet." Not only is he more conscious than she of the state of her orgasm, he 
enjoys a complacent sadistic awareness of what "punishment" might ensue, 
if she isn't "good." 

What follows is the passage I have quoted at the outset, almost exclusively 
a description of Rojack's activity— and properly so— as coitus here is simply 
his accomplishment as enacted upon Ruta, and therefore its value is pre- 
cisely its value to him. Very much a solo flight, it is by no means inappropri- 
ate that the imagery employed is aeronautic, "I was gone like a bat," etc. It is 
also a summary of Rojack's major interests: sport— "I was ready to chase"; 
"leaping back and forth in separate runs for separate strokes"; "an icy slalom 
with the speed at my heels"; alcohol— "to bring booze and heat up and licking 
tongues"; and religion. 

By now it is hardly surprising that his orgasm should take on cosmic and 
metaphysical implications: "a choice which would take me on one wind or 
another," "one of those splittings of a second where the senses fly out" and 
give rise to visions of a "huge city in some desert, was it a place on the moon?" 
What is more noteworthy are the elaborate configurations in the act of 
the Lord and the Devil. The Devil is manifestly an anal force. The Lord 
smiles upon Rojack's high mission to fertilize the humble and bring the "spoils 
and secrets" of his semen to the "sad womb" of this lowly woman through 
the favor of his visitation. Indeed, Ruta's "cunt" as Rojack calls it, has pros- 
pered through association with him and grown respectable: "It was no 
graveyard now, no warehouse, no, more like a chapel now." But despite the 
purloined phrases from William Blake it is still no great shakes, simply 
"... a modest decent place, but its walls were snug," and appropriately, it 
is aware of its exalted, if only sporadic, honor in housing Rojack himself, 
who deigns to find in it "a muted reverential sweetness." But having defined 
the organ in question in terms of several types of public buildings, Rojack 
finally comes to detect in it a prison with "walls of stone." 

The result of this discovery is that, at the last moment, he escapes back to 
the freewheeling Devil of sodomy. The chief function of this passage is to 

a* Bid. 
« Ibid. 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



IS 



provide a way for Rojack to commit his crime a second time in symbolic cir- 
cumstances. Given the often emphasized choice between the Devil (sodomy) 
and the Lord (procreation), or death and life, Rojack once again opts for 
death. Just as he refuses what we are asked to believe is a portentous exis- 
tential opportunity to sweeten Ruta's womb with his magical semen (infalli- 
ble in its power to bring about conception), so too does Rojack Tefuse the 
choice of acknowledging his crime, accepting responsibility for it and going 
to prison. Ruta's vagina has constituted his foretaste of prison. " 'That is what 
prison will be like for you' said a last effort on my inner tongue. 'Stay here!' 
came a command from inside of me." But the Devil has more exotic and dy- 
namic attractions. Rojack claims that he is compelled to his decision and he 
explains it in terms of a generosity which pertains only to himself: "I had to 
give myself, I could not hold back." Ruta and prison must do without the 
hallowed presence of the hero so that Rojack may have his ultimate satis- 
faction: "I jammed up her ass and came as if I'd been flung across the room. 
She let out a cry of rage." It seems that Mailer is both a romantic manichean 
and a romantic diabolist. 

After receiving his servant's congratulations on his dazzling performance, 
Rojack proceeds calmly to the next floor and throws his wife's body out of 
the window. He has elected to remain with the Devil and stay alive. Ruta 
has been a vessel of considerable utility. Through her, or rather through her 
"ass," the hero has made his major decision: to pass the murder off as an ac- 
cident. And as Ruta was compliant to an outlandish degree, so is the rest of 
the world. All obstacles melt before Rojack, who hereafter is a miracle of 
tough dispatch. Once almost a 'loser," he is rejuvenated and remade through 
the act of murder: he wins a fight with a black gangster who cowers before 
him, a fortune at the tables at Las Vegas, and the love of a nightclub singer 
who wants him to make her a lady (the last detail a fatuity which is better 
passed over in silence). Even the police look on Rojack with eyes blinded 
by admiring comradery, and he is permitted to escape to Yucatan. In fact, 
Mailer's An American Dream is an exercise in how to kill your wife and be 
happy ever after. The reader is given to understand that by murdering one 
woman and buggering another, Rojack became a "man," 

The humanist convictions which underlie Crime and Punishment (the 
original and still the greatest study in what it is like to commit murder), may 
all go by the board. Both Dostoyevsky and Dreiser, in An American Tragedy, 
gradually created in their murderers an acceptance of responsibility for the 
violation of life which their actions constituted, and both transcend their 
crimes through atonement. Rojack has some singularity in being one of the 
first literary characters to get away with murder; he is surely the first hero 
as homicide to rejoice in his crime and never really lose his creator's sup- 
port. In Native Son, Richard Wright understood Bigger Thomas' crime while 
never condoning it and made of it a prototypical fable of the logic of rage in 
a racist society. Mailer also appears to find in Rojack a symbolic figure whose 



i6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



crime is diagnostic of conditions in American society. But the condition ap- 
pears to be simply a hostility between the sexes so bitter that it has reached 
the proportions of a war waged in terms of murder and sodomy. (Rojack 
knew "all women were killers," who "must kill" unless "we" master them 
"altogether.") 35 And Mailer is to be on the winning side, to which end he 
has created in Rojack the last warrior for a curious cause, none other than 
male supremacy. Rojack is a far cry from Wright's underdog from a Chicago 
slum acting only through desperation in a novel that is both a plea for racial 
justice and a threatening vision of what may come to pass should the hope 
of it fail. Rojack belongs to the oldest ruling class in the world, and like one 
of Faulkner's ancient retainers of a lost cause, he is making his stand on 
the preservation of a social hierarchy that sees itself as threatened with ex- 
tinction. His partial Jewish ancestry and his "liberal" views to the contrary, 
Rojack is the last surviving white man as conquering hero. Mailer's An 
American Dream is a rallying cry for a sexual politics in which diplomacy 
has failed and war is the last political resort of a ruling caste that feels its 
position in deadly peril. 



Ill 

A few days later, when I met him near the docks, Armand ordered me to fol- 
low him. Almost without speaking, he took me to his room. With the same 
apparent scorn he subjected me to his pleasure. 

Dominated by his strength and age, I gave the work my utmost care. Crushed 
by that mass of flesh, which was devoid of the slightest spirituality, I experienced 
the giddiness of finally meeting the perfect brute, indifferent to my happiness. 
I discovered the sweetness that could be contained in a thick fleece on torso, 
belly and thighs and what force it could transmit. I finally let myself be buried 
in that stormy night. Out of gratitude or fear I placed a kiss on Armand's hairy 
arm. 

"What's eating you? Are you nuts or something?" 

"I didn't do any harm." 

I remained at his side in order to serve his nocturnal pleasure. When we 
went to bed, Armand whipped his leather belt from the loops of his trousers 
and made it snap. It was flogging an invisible victim, a shape of transparent 
flesh. The air bled. If he frightened me then, it was because of his powerlessness 
to be the Armand I see, who is heavy and mean. The snapping accompanied 
and supported him. His rage and despair at not being him made him tremble 
like a horse subdued by darkness, made him tremble more and more. He would 
not, however, have tolerated my living idly. He advised me to prowl around 
the station or the zoo and pick up customers. Knowing the terror inspired in 
me by his person, he didn't deign to keep any eye on me. The money I earned 
I brought back intact. 30 

35 Ibid., p. 82, p. 100. 

36 Jean Genet, The Thief's Journal, translated from the French by Bernard Frecht- 
man (New York: Grove Press, 1964), p. 134. 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 17 

This quotation, from Jean Genet's autobiographical novel The Thief's 
Journal, is the first passage in which the author's identification is with the 
"female figure." Jean Genet is both male and female. Young, poor, a criminal 
and a beggar, he was also initially the despised drag queen, the -nmricone 
(faggot), contemptible because he was the female partner in homosexual 
acts. Older, distinguished by fame, wealthy and secure, he became a male; 
though never ascending to the full elevation of the pimp (or supermale). 

Sexual iole is not a matter of biological identity but of class or caste in 
the hierocratic homosexual society projected in Genet's novels. Because of 
the perfection with which they ape and exaggerate the "masculine" and 
"feminine" of heterosexual society, his homosexual characters represent the 
best contemporary insight into its constitution and beliefs. Granted that their 
caricature is grotesque, and Genet himself is fully aware of the morbidity 
of this pastiche, his homosexuals nonetheless have unerringly penetrated to 
the essence of what heterosexual society imagines to be the character of 
"masculine" and "feminine," and which it mistakes for the nature of male 
and female, thereby preserving the traditional relation of the sexes. Sartre's 
brilliant psychoanalytic biography of Genet describes the sexual life of the 
pimps and queens, male and female figures, in terms that bear out these dis- 
tinctions of character and prestige: 

This is murder: submissive to a corpse, neglected, unnoticed, gazed at unmind- 
fully and manipulated from behind, the girl queen is metamorphosed into a 
contemptible female object. She does not even have for the pimp the importance 
that the sadist attributes to his victim. The latter, though tortured and humili- 
ated, at least remains the focal point of her tormentor's concern. It is indeed 
she whom he wishes to reach, in her particularity, in the depths of her con- 
sciousness. But the fairy is only a receptacle, a vase, a spittoon, which one uses 
and thinks no more of and which one discards by the very use one makes of it. 
The pimp masturbates in her. At the very instant when an irresistible force 
knocks her down, turns her over and punctures her, a dizzying word swoops 
down upon heT, a power hammer that strikes her as if she were a medal: 
"Encule!" [Faggot] 37 

This is mainly a description of what it is to be female as reflected in the 
mirror society of homosexuality. But the passage also implies what it is to be 
male. It is to be master, hero, brute, and pimp. Which is also to be irremedi- 
ably stupid and cowardly. In this feudal relationship of male and female, 
pimp and queen, one might expect exchange of servitude for protection. 
But the typical pimp never protects his slave, and allows him/her to be 
beaten, betrayed, or even killed, responding only with ambiguous amuse- 

ST Jean-Paul Sartre, Saint Genet, Actor and Martyr, translated from the French 
by Bernard Frechtman. (New York: Braziller, 1963), P- «5- *" a footnote, Frechtman 
translates "Encule" as one who gets buggered, but as English lacks such an expres- 
sion, he suggests "cock-sucker" as the best equivalent of the insult 



i8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



19 



ment. One is naturally curious to discover just what the queen does receive 
in return. The answer appears to be an intensity of humiliation which con- 
stitutes identity for those who despise themselves. This, in turn, leads us to 
the reasons For such self-despair. 

With Genet they are quite explicit, and Sartre has little difficulty outlining 
them. A bastard, Genet was repudiated at birth and left at an orphanage; 
the double rejection of what can only be described as an error from incep- 
tion. Adopted then by a family of narrow Morvan peasants, he was found 
stealing and sent to grow up in a children's prison. There he experiences his 
final ostracism in being subjected to rape by older and stronger males, He 
has now achieved the lowest status in the world as he saw it; a perfection of 
opprobrium in being criminal, queer, and female. It remained only to study 
and refine his role, thus the wallowing in self-hatred which both Sartre and 
Genet describe as the "femininity" of the passive homosexual. He is feminine 
because ravished and subjugated by the male; therefore he must study the 
slavish gestures of "femininity" that he may better exalt his master. As a crim- 
inal he is obliged to controvert every decency of the property-owning class 
not only through a life of larceny (material) hut through one of betrayal 
(moral) as well. And as an outcast, his life's demeanor must be plotted both 
to imitate and to contradict every notion of the world beyond whose bound- 
aries he lives in exile. 

But having gone this far, having plunged this low, Genet studies the 
values of those who live above him so that he may further desecrate them. 
In doing so he acquires the pride of the utterly abject, a condition which 
turns out to be next door to saintliness. As a young beggar and whore in the 
Barrio Chino of Barcelona, Genet attained this sanctity and the unshakable 
self-respect of one who has truly nothing more to lose. Out of this sprang a 
wily urge to live. And for those who continue in downright ignominy, the 
will to live may very plausibly become the will to triumph. This whole cast 
of thought is generously supported by the French tradition wherein martyr- 
dom is still the highest boon open to the religious imagination. In Catholic 
Europe sainthood remains, even among the renegades, the loftiest state of 
grace. That is why Divine, the hero/heroine of Our Lady of the Flowers, 
who is also Genet, is uncontestably a larger spirit than Darling, Gorgui, 
Armand, Stilitano, and all the other pimps. Not only has she greater courage, 
humor, imagination, and sensibility than the male oppressors before whom 
she prostrates herself; she alone has a soul. She has suffered, while they have 
not, because the consciousness required for suffering is inaccessible to them. 
And in Divine's mortification, both in the flesh and in the spirit, lies the vic- 
tory of the saint. 

Thus Genet's two great novels, Our Lady of the Flowers and The Thief's 
Journal, are tales of an odium converted to grandeur. But together with the 
rest of his prose fiction they also constitute a painstaking exegesis of the 
barbarian vassalage of the sexual orders, the power structure of "masculine" 



and "feminine" as revealed by a homosexual, criminal world that mimics 
with brutal frankness the bourgeois heterosexual society. 

In this way the explication of the homosexual code becomes a satire on 
the heterosexual one. By virtue of their earnestness, Genet's community of 
pimps and fairies call into ridicule the behavior they so fervently imitate: 

As for slang Divine did not use it, any more than did her cronies the other 
Nellys . . . 

Slang was for men. It was the male tongue. Like the language of men among 
the Caribees, it became a secondary sexual attribute. It was like the colored 
plumage of male birds, like the multi-colored silk garments which are the pre- 
rogatives of the warriors of the tribe. It was a crest and spurs. Everyone could 
understand it, but the only ones who could speak it were the men who at birth 
received as a gift the gestures, the carriage of the hips, legs and arms, the eyes, 
the chest, with which one can speak it. One day at one of our bars, when Mimosa 
ventured the following words in the course of a sentence ". . . his screwy 
stories . . ." the men frowned. Someone said with a threat in his voice: "Broad 
acting tough." 38 

The virility of the pimp is a transparent egotism posing as strength. His 
"masculinity" is in fact the most specious of petty self-inflations and is system- 
atically undermined by the true heroes of these adventures, the queens. 
Though Genet is a great romantic and has created in Divine what is perhaps 
the last and possibly the most illustrious of those archetypal great-hearted 
whores so dear to the French tradition, Genet is just as certainly a cold- 
blooded rationalist whose formidable analytic mind has fastened upon the 
most fundamental of society's arbitrary follies, its view of sex as a caste struc- 
ture ratified by nature. 

Beginning with the dissection of sexual attitudes in his prose fiction, Genet 
has gone on in his plays to survey the parent world of the parasitic homo- 
sexual community-that larger society where most of us imagine we are at 
home. Emerging from the little world of homosexual crime which still con- 
cerned him in Death-watch and The Maids, he brought the truths he had 
learned there to bear on the complacencies of the "normal" world which 
for so long had banished and condemned him. His most scathing critique of 
sexual politics is found in his most recent works for the theater, The Blacks, 
The Balcony, and The Screens, 

What he has to tell this snug and pious enclave will hardly furnish it with 
the reassuring bromides they have begun to feel the need of and take as a 
balm from old retainers like Norman Mailer and Henry Miller. Genet sub- 
mits the entire social code of "masculine" and "feminine" to a disinterested 
scrutiny and concludes that it is odious. 

88 Jean Genet, Out Lady of the Flowers, translated by Bernard Frechtman (New 
York-. Grove Press, 1963), p. 90. 



*L 



so SEXUAL POLITICS 

If Arniand is but a brute and a fool, there is really, as Genet demonstrates, 
no cause for surprise. He was schooled to be such through every element of 
his education and was clearly given to understand that these traits were no 
less than the fulfillment of his very nature as a male. All he has learned has 
taught him to identify "masculine" with force, cruelty, indifference, egotism, 
and property. It is no wonder that he regards his penis as a talisman: both 
an instrument to oppress and the very symbol, in fact the reality, of his 
status: "My cock," he once said, "is worth its weight in gold . . ." M At other 
times he boasts that he can lift a heavy man on the end of it. Armand auto- 
matically associated sexuality with power, with his solitary pleasure, and with 
the pain and humiliation of his partner, who is nothing but an object to him 
in the most literal sense. Intercourse is an assertion of mastery, one that an- 
nounces his ovvn higher caste and proves it upon a victim who is expected 
to surrender, serve, and be satisfied. 

Armand, for all his turpitude, is at once both more primitive and more 
logical than a "gentleman," and more honest and direct than the respectable 
bourgeois whose real convictions he has simply put into practice, and who, 
by no accident, enjoys reading such passages for the vicarious illusion 
of mastery which he fancies is offered therein. 

The Balcony is Genet's theory of revolution and counterrevolution. The 
play is set in a brothel and concerns a revolution which ends in failure, 
as the patrons and proprietors of a whorehouse are persuaded to assume the 
roles of the former government. Having studied human relationships in the 
world of pimp and faggot, Genet has come to understand how sexual caste 
supersedes all other forms of inegalitarianism: racial, political, or economic. 
The Balcony demonstrates the futility of all forms of revolution which pre- 
serve intact the basic unit of exploitation and oppression, that between the 
sexes, male and female, or any of the substitutes for them. Taking the funda- 
mental human connection, that of sexuality, to be the nuclear model of all 
the more elaborate social constructs growing out of it, Genet perceives that 
it is in itself not only hopelessly tainted but the very prototype of institution- 
alized inequality. He is convinced that by dividing humanity into two groups 
and appointing one to rule over the other by virtue of birthright, the social 
order has already established and ratified a system of oppression which will 
underlie and corrupt all other human relationships as well as every area of 
thought and experience. 

The first scene, which takes place between a prostitute and a bishop, epit- 
omizes the play much as it does the society it describes. The cleric holds 
power only through the myth of religion, itself dependent on the fallacy of 
sin, in turn conditional on the lie that the female is sexuality itself and 
therefore an evil worthy of the bishop's condign punishment. By such devious 
routes does power circle round and round the hopeless mess we have made 

30 The Thief's Journal, p. 135. 



INSTANCES OF SEXUAL POLITICS 21 

of sexuality. Partly through money: for it is with money that the woman is 
purchased, and economic dependency is but another sign of her bondage to 
a system whose coercive agents are actual as well as mythical. Delusions 
about sex foster delusions of power, and both depend on the reification of 
woman. 

That the Bishop is actually a gasman visiting the bordello's "chambers 
of illusions" so that he can vicariously share in the power of the church 
only clarifies the satire on the sexual class system. Those males relegated to 
reading gas meters may still participate in the joys of mastery through the 
one human being any male can buy— a female as whore. And the whore, 
one wonders, what profits her? Nothing. Her "role" in the ritual theater 
where sexual, political, and social institutions are so felicitously combined 
is merely to accommodate the ruling passion of each of her rentiers. 

In the second scene, the whore is a thief and a criminal (versions of 
Genet himself) so that a bank clerk may play at justice and morality. Her 
judge may order her whipped by a muscular executioner or grant her mercy 
in a transcendent imitation of the powers-that-be, powers reserved to other 
more fortunate males. The General of Scene III, following his own notions 
of masculine majesty, converts his whore into his mount and plays at hero 
while her mouth bleeds from the bit. No matter with which of the three 
leading roles of sinner, malefactor, or animal the male client may choose 
to mime his delusions of grandeur, the presence of the woman is utterly 
essential. To each masquerading male the female is a mirror in which he 
beholds himself. And the penultimate moment in his illusory but pur- 
chasable power fantasy is the moment when whether as Bishop, Judge, or 
General, he "fucks" her as woman, as subject, as chattel. 

The political wisdom implicit in Genet's statement in the play is that un- 
less the ideology of real or fantasized virility is abandoned, unless the 
clinging to male supremacy as a birthright is finally foregone, all systems 
of oppression will continue to function simply by virtue of their logical 
and emotional mandate in the primary human situation. 

But what of the madame herself? Irma, The Balcony's able and dedicated 
administrator, makes money by selling other women, wherein it may be 
observed how no institution holds sway without collaborators and overseers. 
Chosen as queen under the counterrevolution, Irma does nothing at all, 
for queens do not rule. In fact, they do not even exist in themselves; they 
die as persons once they assume their function, as the Envoy graciously ex- 
plains. Their function is to serve as figureheads and abstractions to males, 
just as Chantal, a talented former whore who moves for a moment toward 
human realization by means of her hope in the revolution, wavers, and 
then is sold anew and converted into the sexual figurehead for the rising 
when it becomes corrupt and betrays its radical ideals under the usual excuse 
of expediency. "In order to win" it adopts the demented consciousness of its 
opponent and establishes a rotten new version of all it had once stood 



i 

-1 



22 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



against. In no time it turns the rebellion into a suicidal carnival, an orgy 
of blood connected to the old phallic fantasy of "shoot and screw." 'its totem 
is the ritual scapegoat provided by every army's beauty queen since Troy. 
Once Chantal enters upon the mythical territory of a primitive standard and 
prize over whom males will tear each other apart, the revolution passes ir- 
revocably into counterrevolution. 

Throughout The Balcony Genet explores the pathology of virility, the 
chimera of sexual congress as a paradigm of power over other human be- 
ings. He appears to be the only living male writer of first-class literary gifts 
to have transcended the sexual myths of our era. His critique of the hetero- 
sexual politic points the way toward a true sexual revolution, a path which 
must be explored if any radical social change is to come about. In Genet's 
analysis, it is fundamentally impossible to change society without changing 
personality, and sexual personality as it has generally existed must undergo 
the most drastic overhaul. 

If we are to be free at last, Genet proposes in the last scenes of the play, 
we must first break those chains of our own malcing through our blind 
acceptance of common ideas. The three great cages in which we are im- 
mured must be dismantled. The first is the potential power of the "Great 
Figures"-the cleric, the judge and the warrior-elements of myth which 
have enslaved consciousness in a coil of self-imposed absurdity. The second 
is the omnipotence of the police state, the only virtual power in a corrupt 
society, all other forms of coercion being largely psychological. Last, and 
most insidious of all, is the cage of sex, the cage in which all others are 
enclosed: for is not the totem of Police Chief George a six-foot rubber phal- 
lus, a puck of great stature"? And the old myth of sin and virtue, the myth 
of guilt and innocence, the myth of heroism and cowardice on which the 
Great Figures repose, the old pillars of an old and decadent structure, are 
also built on the sexual fallacy. (Or as one is tempted to pun, phallacy.) By 
attempting to replace this corrupt and tottering edifice while preserving its 
foundations, the revolution's own bid for social transformation inevitably 
tails and turns into the counterrevolution where the Grand Balcony, a first- 
class whorehouse, furnishes both costumes and actors for the new pseudo- 
government. 

Genet's play ends as it had begun. Irma turning out the lights informs us 
we may go home, where ail is falser than the theater's rites. The brothel will 
open again tomorrow for an identical ritual. The sounds of revolution begin 
again offstage, but unless the Police Chief is permanently imprisoned in his 
tomb and unless the new rebels have truly forsworn the customary idiocy of 
the old sexual politics, there will be no revolution. Sex is deep at the heart 
of our troubles, Genet is urging, and unless we eliminate the most perni- 
cious of our systems of oppression, unless we go to the very center of the 
sexual politic and its sick delirium of power and violence, all our efforts at 
liberation will only land us again in the same primordial stews. 



TWO 



Theory of 
Sexual Politics 



The three instances of sexual description we have examined so far were 
remarkable for the large part which notions of ascendancy and power played 
within them. Coitus can scarcely be said to take place in a vacuum; although 
of itself it appears a biological and physical activity, it is set so deeply within 
the larger context of human affairs that it serves as a charged microcosm 
of the variety of attitudes and values to which culture subscribes. Among 
other things, it may serve as a model of sexual politics on an individual or 
personal plane. 

But of course the transition from such scenes of intimacy to a wider con- 
text of political reference is a great step indeed. In introducing the term 
"sexual politics," one must first answer the inevitable question "Can the rela- 
tionship between the sexes be viewed in a political light at all?" The answer 
depends on how one defines politics. 1 This essay does not define the political 
as that relatively narrow and exclusive world of meetings, chairmen, and 
parties. The term "politics" shall refer to power-structured relationships, ar- 
rangements whereby one group of persons is controlled by another. By way 

i The American Heritage Dictionary's fourth definition is fairly approximate: 
"methods or tactics involved in managing a state 01 government." American Heritage 
Dictionary ([New York: American Heritage and Houghton Mifflin, 1969). One might 
expand this to a set of strategems designed to maintain a system. If one understands patri- 
archy to he an institution perpetuated by such techniques of control, one has a working 
definition of how politics is conceived in this essay. 



M SEXUAL POLITICS 

of parenthesis one might add that although an ideal politics might simply 
be conceived of as the arrangement of human life on agreeable and rational 
principles from whence the entire notion of power over others should be 
banished, one must confess that this is not what constitutes the political as 
we know it, and it is to this that we must address ourselves. 

The following sketch, which might be described as "notes toward a theory 
of patriarchy," will attempt to prove that sex is a status category with polit- 
ical implications. Something of a pioneering effort, it must perforce be both 
tentative and imperfect. Because the intention is to provide an overall de- 
scription, statements must be generalized, exceptions neglected, and subhead- 
ings overlapping and, to some degree, arbitrary as well. 

The word "politics" is enlisted here when speaking of the sexes primarily 
because such a word is eminently useful in outlining the real nature of their 
relative status, historically and at the present. It is opportune, perhaps today 
even mandatory, that we develop a more relevant psychology and philosophy 
of power relationships beyond the simple conceptual framework provided 
by our traditional formal politics. Indeed, it may be imperative that we give 
some attention to defining a theory of politics which treats of power rela- 
tionships on grounds less conventional than those to which we are accus- 
tomed. 2 I have therefore found it pertinent to define them on grounds of 
personal contact and interaction between members of well-defined and co- 
herent groups: races, castes, classes, and sexes. For it is precisely because 
certain groups have no representation in a number of recognized political 
structures that their position tends to be so stable, their oppression so con- 
tinuous. 

In America, recent events have forced us to acknowledge at last that the 
relationship between the races is indeed a political one which involves the 
general control of one collectivity, defined by birth, over another collectivity, 
also defined by birth. Groups who rule by birthright are fast disappearing, 
yet there remains one ancient and universal scheme for the domination of 
one birth group by another-the scheme that prevails in the area of sex. The 
study of racism has convinced us that a truly political state of affairs oper- 
ates between the races to perpetuate a series of oppressive circumstances. The 
subordinated group has inadequate redress through existing political institu- 
tions, and is deterred thereby from organizing into conventional political 
struggle and opposition. 

Quite in the same manner, a disinterested examination of our system of 
sexual relationship must point out that the situation between the sexes now, 
and throughout history, is a case of that phenomenon Max Weber defined 

2 1 am indebted here to Ronald V. Samson's The Psychology of Power (New York: 
Random House, 1968) for his intelligent investigation of the connection between formal 
power structures and the family and for his analysis of how power corrupts basic human 
relationships. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



*5 



as herrschaft, a relationship of dominance and subordinance. 3 What 
goes largely unexamined, often even unacknowledged (yet is institutionalized 
nonetheless) in our social order, is the birthright priority whereby males rule 
females. Through this system a most ingenious form of "interior coloniza- 
tion" has been achieved. It is one which tends moreover to be sturdier than 
any form of segregation, and more rigorous than class stratification, more 
uniform, certainly more enduring. However muted its present appearance 
may be, sexual dominion obtains nevertheless as perhaps the most pervasive 
ideology of our culture and provides its most fundamental concept of power. 

This is so because our society, like all other historical civilizations, is a 
patriarchy. 4 The fact is evident at once if one recalls that the military, in- 
dustry, technology, universities, science, political office, and finance— in short, 
every avenue of power within the society, including the coercive force of 
the police, is entirely in male hands. As the essence of politics is power, 
such realization cannot fail to carry impact. What lingers of supernatural 
authority, the Deity, "His" ministry, together with the ethics and values, the 
philosophy and art of our culture— its very civilization— as T. S. Eliot once 
observed, is of male manufacture. 

If one takes patriarchal government to be the institution whereby that 
half of the populace which is female is controlled by that half which is 
male, the principles of patriarchy appear to be two fold: male shall dominate 
female, elder male shall dominate younger. However, just as with any hu- 
man institution, there is frequently a distance between the real and the 
ideal; contradictions and exceptions do exist within the system. While patri- 
archy as an institution is a social constant so deeply entrenched as to run 
through all other political, social, or economic forms, whether of caste or class, 
feudality or bureaucracy, just as it pervades all major religions, it also ex- 
hibits great variety in history and locale. In democracies, for example, females 
have often held no office or do so (as now) in such minuscule numbers as to 

3 "Domination in the quite general sense of power, i.e. the possibility of imposing one's 
will upon the behavior of other persons, can emerge in the most diverse forms." In this 
central passage of Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Weber is particularly interested in two 
such forms: control through social authority ("patriarchal, magisterial, or princely") arid 
control through economic force. In patriarchy as in other forms of domination "that 
control over economic goods, i.e. economic power, is a frequent, often purposively willed, 
consequence of domination as well as one of its most important instruments." Quoted 
from Max Rheinstein's and Edward Shil's translation of portions of Wirtschaft und 
Gesellschaft entitled Ala* Weber on Law in Economy and Society (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1967), pp. 323-24. 

4 No matriarchal societies are known to exist at present. Matrilineality, which may 
be, as some anthropologists have held, a residue or a transitional stage of matriarchy, 
does not constitute an exception to patriarchal rule, it simply channels the power held 
by males through female descent—, e.g. the Avunculate. 

Radical democracy would, of course, preclude patriarchy. One might find evidence 
of a general satisfaction with a less than perfect democracy in the fact that women have 
so rarely held power within modern "democracies." 



L 




a6 SEXUAL POLITICS 

be below even token representation. Aristocracy, on the other hand, with 
its emphasis upon the magic and dynastic properties of blood, may at times 
permit women to hold power. The principle of rule by elder males is vio- 
lated even more frequently. Bearing in mind the variation and degree in 
patriarchy— as say between Saudi Arabia and Sweden, Indonesia and Red 
China-we also recognize our own form in the U.S. and Europe to be much 
altered and attenuated by the reforms described in the next chapter. 

I Ideological 

Hannah Arendt has observed that government is upheld by power 
supported either through consent or imposed through violence. Conditioning 
to an ideology amounts to the former. Sexual politics obtains consent through 
the "socialization" of both sexes to basic patriarchal polities with regard to 
temperament, role, and status. As to status, a pervasive assent to ihe preju- 
dice of male superiority guarantees superior status in the male, inferior in the 
female. The first item, temperament, involves the formation of human per- 
sonality along stereotyped lines of sex category ("masculine" and "fem- 
inine"), based on the needs and values of the dominant group and dictated 
by what its members cherish in themselves and find convenient in subordi- 
nates: aggression, intelligence, force, and efficacy in the male; passivity, ig- 
norance, docility, "virtue," and ineffectuality in the female. This is comple- 
mented by a second factor, sex role, which decrees a consonant and highly 
elaborate code of conduct, gesture and attitude for each sex. In terms of 
activity, sex role assigns domestic service and attendance upon infants to the 
female, the rest of human achievement, interest, and ambition to the male. 
The limited role allotted the female tends to arrest her at the level of biolog- 
ical experience. Therefore, nearly all that can be described as distinctly hu- 
man rather than animal activity (in their own way animals also give birth 
and care for their young) is largely reserved for the male. Of course, status 
again follows from such an assignment. Were one to analyze the three cate- 
gories one might designate status as the political component, role as the 
sociological, and temperament as the psychological-yet their interdepend- 
ence is unquestionable and they form a chain. Those awarded higher status 
tend to adopt roles of mastery, largely because they are first encouraged to 
develop temperaments of dominance. That this is true of caste and class as 
well is self-evident. 

II Biological 

Patriarchal religion, popular attitude, and to some degree, science as 
well 7 assumes these psycho-social distinctions to rest upon biological differ- 

« Hannah Arendt, "Speculations on Violence," The New York Review of Books, 
Vol. XII No. 4, February 17, 1969, p. 24. 

7 The social, rather than the physical sciences are referred to here. Traditionally, 
medical science had often subscribed to such beliefs. This is no longer the case today, 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



27 



ences between the sexes, so that where culture is acknowledged as shaping 
behavior, it is said to do no more than cooperate with nature. Yet the tem- 
peramental distinctions created in patriarchy ("masculine" and "feminine" 
personality traits) do not appear to originate in human nature, those of role 
and status still less. 

The heavier musculature of the male, a secondary sexual characteristic 
and common among mammals, is biological in origin but is also culturally 
encouraged through breeding, diet and exercise. Yet it is hardly an adequate 
category on which to base political relations within civilization. 6 Male su- 
premacy, like other political creeds, does not finally reside in physical strength 
but in the acceptance of a value system which is not biological. Superior 
physical strength is not a factor in political relations— vide those of race and 
class. Civilization has always been able to substitute other methods (technic, 
weaponry, knowledge) for those of physical strength, and contemporary 
civilization has no further need of it. At present, as in the past, physical 
exertion is very generally a class factor, those at the bottom performing 
the most strenuous tasks, whether they be strong or not. 

It is often assumed that patriarchy is endemic in human social life, ex- 
plicable or even inevitable on the grounds of human physiology. Such a 
theory grants patriarchy logical as well as historical origin. Yet if as some 
anthropologists believe, patriarchy is not of primeval origin, but was pre- 
ceded by some other social form we shall call pre-patriarchal, then the argu- 
ment of physical strength as a theory of patriarchal origins would hardly 
constitute a sufficient explanation— unless the male's superior physical strength 
was released in accompaniment with some change in orientation through 
new values or new knowledge. Conjecture about origins is always frustrated 
by lack of certain evidence. Speculation about prehistory, which of necessity 
is what this must be, remains nothing but speculation. Were one to indulge 
in it, one might argue the likelihood of a hypothetical period preceding pa- 

when the best medical research points to the conclusion that sexual stereotypes have no 
bases in biology. 

8 "The historians of Roman laws, having veiy justly remarked that neither birth nor 
affection was the foundation of the Roman family, have concluded that this foundation 
must be found in the power of the father or husband. They make a sort of primordial 
institution of this power; but they do not explain how this power was established, unless 
it was by the superiority of strength of the husband over the wife, and of the father over 
the children. Now, we deceive ourselves sadly when we thus place force as the origin of 
law. We shall see farther on that the authority of the father or husband, far from having 
been the first cause, was itself an effect; it was derived from religion, and was estab- 
lished by religion. Superior strength, therefore, was not the principle that established 
the family." Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges, The Ancient City (1864). English 
translation by Willard Small (1873), Doubleday Anchor Reprint, pp. 41-42. Unfor- 
tunately Fustel de Coulanges neglects to mention how religion came to uphold patri- 
archal authority, since patriarchal religion is also an effect, rather than an original cause. 



28 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



19 



triarchy. 9 What would be crucial to such a premise would be a state of mind 
in which the primary principle would be regarded as fertility or vitalist proc- 
esses. In a primitive condition, before it developed civilization or any but the 
crudest technic, humanity would perhaps find the most impressive evidence 
of creative force in the visible birth of children, something of a miraculous 
event and linked analogically with the growth of the earth's vegetation. 

It is possible that the circumstance which might drastically redirect such 
attitudes would be the discovery of paternity. There is some evidence that 
fertility cults in ancient society at some point took a cum toward patriarchy, 
displacing and downgrading female function in procreation and attributing 
the power of life to the phallus alone. Patriarchal religion could consolidate 
this position by the creation of a male God or gods, demoting, discrediting, or 
eliminating goddesses and constructing a theology whose basic postulates 
are male supremacist, and one of whose central functions is to uphold and 
validate the patriarchal structure. 10 

So much for the evanescent delights afforded by the game of origins. The 
question of the historical origins of patriarchy— whether patriarchy origi- 
nated primordially in the male's superior strength, or upon a later mobiliza- 
tion of such strength under certain circumstances— appears at the moment 
to be unanswerable. It is also probably irrelevant to contemporary pa- 
triarchy, where we are left with the realities of sexual politics, still grounded, 
we are often assured, on nature. Unfortunately, as the psycho-social dis- 
tinctions made between the two sex groups which are said to justify their 
present political relationship are not the clear, specific, measurable and neu- 
tral ones of the physical sciences, but are instead of an entirely different 
character— vague, amorphous, often even quasi-religious in phrasing— it must 
be admitted that many of the generally understood distinctions between the 
sexes in the more significant areas of role and temperament, not to mention 
status, have in fact, essentially cultural, rather than biological, bases. 
Attempts to prove that temperamental dominance is inherent in the male 
(which for its advocates, would be tantamount to validating, logically as 
well as historically, the patriarchal situation regarding role and status) have 
been notably unsuccessful. Sources in the field are in hopeless disagreement 

One might also include the caveat that such a social order need not imply the 
domination of one sex which the term "matriarchy" would, by its semantic analogue to 
patriarchy, infer. Given the simpler scale of life and the fact that female-centered fertility 
religion might be offset by male physical strength, pre-patriarchy might have been fairly 
equalitarian. 

10 Something like this appears to have taken place as the culture of Neolithic agricul- 
tural villages gave way to the culture of civilization and to patriarchy with the rise of 
cities. See Louis Mumford, The City in History (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1961), 
Chapter One, A discovery such as paternity, a major acquisition of "scientific" knowledge 
might, hypotheticaHy, have led to an expansion of population, surplus labor and strong- 
class stratification. There is good reason to suppose that the transformation of hunting 
into war also played a part. 



about the nature of sexual differences, but the most reasonable among them 
have despaired of the ambition of any definite equation between tempera- 
ment and biological nature. It appears that we are not soon to be enlight- 
ened as to the existence of any significant inherent differences between male 
and female beyond the bio-genital ones we already know. Endocrinology 
and genetics afford no definite evidence of determining mental-emotional 
differences. 11 

Not only is there insufficient evidence for the thesis that the present social 
distinctions of patriarchy (status, role, temperament) are physical in origin, 
but we are hardly in a position to assess the existing differentiations, since 
distinctions which we know to be culturally induced at present so outweigh 
them. Whatever the "real" differences between the sexes may be, we are not 
likely to know them until the sexes are treated differently, that is alike. And 
this is very far from being the case at present. Important new research not 
only suggests that the possibilities of innate temperamental differences seem 
more remote than ever, but even raises questions as to the validity and per- 
manence of psycho-sexual identity. In doing so it gives fairly concrete positive 
evidence of the overwhelmingly cultural character of gender, i.e. personal- 
ity structure in terms of sexual category. 

What Stoller and other experts define as "core gender identity" is now 
thought to be established in the young by the age of eighteen months. This 
is how Stoller differentiates between sex and gender: 

Dictionaries stress that the major connotation of sex is a biological one, as for 
example, in the phrases sexual relations or the male sex. In agreement with 
this, the word sex, in this work will refer to the male or female sex and the com- 
ponent biological parts that determine whether one is a male or a female; the 
word sexual will have connotations of anatomy and physiology. This obviously 
leaves tremendous areas of behavior, feelings, thoughts and fantasies that are 
related to the sexes and yet do not have primarily biological connotations, It 
is for some of these psychological phenomena that the term gender will be used: 
one can speak of the male sex or the female sex, but one can also talk about 
masculinity and femininity and not necessarily be implying anything about 
anatomy or physiology. Thus, while sex and gender seem to common sense 
inextricably bound together, one purpose of this study will be to confirm the 
fact that the two realms (sex and gender) are not inevitably bound in anything 
like a one-to-one relationship, but each may go into quite independent ways. 12 

u No convincing evidence has so far been advanced in this area. Experimentation 
regarding the connection between hormones and animal behavior not only yields highly 
ambivalent results but brings with it the hazards of reasoning by analogy to human be- 
havior. For a summary of the arguments see David C. Glass (editor), Biology and 
Behavior (New York: Rockefeller University and the Russell Sage Foundation, 1968). 

12 Robert J. Stoller, Sex and Gender (New York, Science House, 1968), from the 
preface, pp. viii-ix. 




¦' 1 



30 SEXUAL POLITICS 

In cases of genital malformation and consequent erroneous gender assign- 
ment at birth, studied at the California Gender Identity Center, the dis- 
covery was made that it is easier to change the sex of an adolescent male 
whose biological identity turns out to be contrary to his gender assignment 
and condirroning-through surgery-than to undo the educational conse- 
quences of years, which have succeeded in making the subject tempera- 
mentally feminine in gesture, sense of self, personality and interests. Studies 
done in Cahfornia under Stoller's direction offer proof that gender identity 
(I am a girl, I am a boy) is the primary identity any human being holds- 
the first as well as the most permanent and far-reaching. Stoller later makes 
emphatic the distinction that sex is biological, gender psychological, and 
therefore cultural: "Gender is a term that has psychological or cultural 
rather than biological connotations. If the proper terms for sex are "male" 
and ^female," the corresponding terms for gender are "masculine" and "fem- 
inine"; these latter may be quite independent of (biological) sex." 13 Indeed, 
so arbitrary is gender, that it may even be contrary to physiology: '*. . . al- 
though the external genitalia (penis, testes, scrotum) contribute to the 
sense of maleness, no one of them is essential for it, not even all of them 
together. In the absence of complete evidence, I agree in general with Money, 
and the Hampsons who show in their large series of intersexed patients that 
gender role is determined by postnatal forces, regardless of the anatomy and 
physiology of the external genitalia." 14 

It is now believed 13 that the human fetus is originally physically female 
until the operation of androgen at a certain stage of gestation causes those 
with y chromosomes to develop into males. Psychosexually (e.g., in terms 
of masculine and feminine, and in contradistinction to male and female) 
there is no differentiation between the sexes at birth. Psychosexual person- 
ality is therefore postnatal and learned. 

. . .the conation existing at birth and for several months thereafter is one of 
psychosexual undifferentiation. Just as in the embryo, morphologic sexual dif- 
ferentiation passes from a plastic stage to one of fixed immutability, so also does 
psychosexual differentiation become fixed and immutable-so much so, that man- 
kind has traditionally assumed that so strong and fixed a feeling as personal 
sexual identity must stem from something innate, instinctive, and not subject 
to postnatal experience and learning. The error of this traditional assumption is 
that the power and permanence of something learned has been underestimated. 

™lbid., p. 9. 

« Ibid., p. 48. 

1G See Mary Jane Sherfey, "The Evolution and Nature of Female Sexuality in Rela- 
tion to Psychoanalytic Theory," Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 
vol. 14 January 1966, no. 1 (New York, International Universities Press Inc.), and 
John Money, "Psychosexual Differentiation," in Sex Research, New Developments (New 
York, Holt, ig6j). r 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



3i 



The experiments of animal ethologists on imprinting have now corrected this 
misconception 



16 



John Money who is quoted above, believes that "the acquisition of a native 
language is a human counterpart to imprinting," and gender first established 
"with the establishment of a native language." 17 This would place the time 
of establishment at about eighteen months. Jerome Kagin's 18 studies in how 
children of pre-speech age are handled and touched, tickled and spoken to in 
terms of their sexual identity ("Is it a boy or a girl?" "Hello, little fellow," 
"Isn't she pretty," etc.) put the most considerable emphasis on purely tactile 
learning which would have much to do with the child's sense of self, even 
before speech is attained. 

Because of our social circumstances, male and female are really two cul- 
tures and their life experiences are utterly different— and this is crucial. Im- 
plicit in all the gender identity development which takes place through 
childhood is the sum total of the parents', the peers', and the culture's notions 
of what is appropriate to each gender by way of temperament, character, in- 
terests, status, worth, gesture, and expression. Every moment of the child's 
life is a clue to how he or she must think and behave to attain or satisfy 
the demands which gender places upon one. In adolescence, the merciless 
task of conformity grows to crisis proportions, generally cooling and settling 
in maturity. 

Since patriarchy's biological foundations appear to be so very insecure, one 
has some cause to admire the strength of a "socialization" which can continue 
a universal condition "on faith alone," as it were, or through an acquired 
value system exclusively. What does seem decisive in assuring the maintenance 
of the temperamental differences between the sexes is the conditioning of 
early childhood. Conditioning runs in a circle of self-perpetuation and self- 
fulfilling prophecy. To take a simple example: expectations the culture cher- 
ishes about his gender identity encourage the young male to develop ag- 
gressive impulses, and the female to thwart her own or rum them inward. 
The result is that the male tends to have aggression reinforced in his be- 
havior, often with significant anti-social possibilities. Thereupon the culture 
consents to believe the possession of the male indicator, the testes, penis, 
and scrotum, in itself characterizes the aggressive impulse, and even vul- 
garly celebrates it in such encomiums as "that guy has balls." The same 
process of reinforcement is evident in producing the chief "feminine" virtue 
of passivity. 

In contemporary terminology, the basic division of temperamental trait 

19 Money, op cit., p. ja. 

" Ibid., p. 13. 

1 8 Jerome Kagin, "The Acquisition and Significance of Sex-Typing," in Review of 
Child Development Research, ed. M. Hoffman (New York, Russell Sage Foundation, 
1964)- 



li! 



1 



3^ 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



33 



is marshaled along the line of "aggression is male" and "passivity is female." 
AH other temperamental traits are somehow— often with the most dexterous 
ingenuity— aligned to correspond. If aggressiveness is the trait of the master 
class, docility must be the corresponding trait of a subject group. The usual 
hope of such line of reasoning is that "nature," by some impossible out- 
side chance, might still be depended upon to rationalize the patriarchal sys- 
tem. An important consideration to be remembered here is that in patriar- 
chy, the function of norm is unthinkingly delegated to the male— were it 
not, one might as plausibly speak of "feminine" behavior as active, and "mas- 
culine" behavior as hyperactive or hyperaggressive. 

Here it might be added, by way of a coda, that data from physical sci- 
ences has recently been enlisted again to support sociological arguments, 
such as those of Lionel Tiger 18 who seeks a genetic justification of 
patriarchy by proposing a "bonding instinct" in males which assures their 
political and social control of human society. One sees the implication of 
such a theory by applying its premise to any ruling group. Tiger's thesis 
appears to be a misrepresentation of the work of Lorenz and other students 
of animal behavior. Since his evidence of inherent trait is patriarchal history 
and organization, his pretensions to physical evidence are both specious and 
circular. One can only advance genetic evidence when one has genetic 
(rather than historical) evidence to advance. As many authorities dismiss 
the possibility of instincts (complex inherent behavioral patterns) in hu- 
mans altogether, admitting only reflexes and drives (far simpler neural re- 
sponses), 20 the prospects of a "bonding instinct" appear particularly forlorn. 

Should one regard sex in humans as a drive, it is still necessary to point 
out that the enormous area of our lives, both in early "socialization" and in 
adult experience, labeled "sexual behavior," is almost entirely the product of 
learning. So much is this the case that even the act of coitus itself is the 
product of a long series of learned responses— responses to the patterns and 
attitudes, even as to the object of sexual choice, which are set up for us by 
our social environment. 

The arbitrary character of patriarchal ascriptions of temperament and 
role has little effect upon their power over us. Nor do the mutually exclu- 
sive, contradictory, and polar qualities of the categories "masculine" and 
"feminine" imposed upon human personality give rise to sufficiently serious 
question among us. Under their aegis each personality becomes little more, 
and often less than half, of its human potential. Politically, the fact that each 
group exhibits a circumscribed but complementary personality and range of 
activity is of secondary importance to the fact that each represents a status 
or power division. In the matter of conformity patriarchy is a governing 

18 Lionel Tiger, Men in Groups (New York, Random House, 1968). 

20 Through instinct subhuman species might undertake the activity of building a com- 
plex nest or hive; through reflex or drive a human being might simply blink, feel 
hunger, etc. 



ideology without peer; it is probable that no other system has ever exercised 
such a complete control over its subjects. 

Ill Sociological 

Patriarchy's chief institution is the family. It is both a mirror oF and a 
connection with the larger society; a patriarchal unit within a patriarchal 
whole. Mediating between the individual and the social structure, the fam- 
ily effects control and conformity where political and other authorities are in- 
sufficient. 21 As the fundamental instrument and the foundation unit of 
patriarchal society the family and its roles are prototypical. Serving as an 
agent of the larger society, the family not only encourages its own members 
to adjust and conform, but acts as a unit in the government of the patriarchal 
state which rules its citizens through its family heads. Even in patriarchal 
societies where they are granted legal citizenship, women tend to be ruled 
through the family alone and have little or no formal relation to the state. 22 

As co-operation between the family and the larger society is essential, else 
both would fall apart, the fate of three patriarchal institutions, the family, 
society, and the state are interrelated. In most forms of patriarchy this has 
generally led to the granting of religious support in statements such as the 
Catholic precept that "the father is head of the family," or Judaism's dele- 
gation of quasi-priestly authority to the male parent. Secular governments 
today also confirm this, as in census practices of designating the male as head 
of household, taxation, passports etc. Female heads of household tend to be re- 
garded as undesirable; the phenomenon is a trait of poverty or misfortune. 
The Confucian prescription that the relationship between ruler and subject 
is parallel to that of father and children points to the essentially feudal 
character of the patriarchal family (and conversely, the familial character 
of feudalism) even in modern democracies, 23 

Traditionally, patriarchy granted the father nearly total ownership over 
wife or wives and children, including the powers of physical abuse and often 
even those of murder and sale. Classically, as head of the family the father 
is both begetter and owner in a system in which kinship is property. 24 Yet 

21 In some of my remarks on the family I am indebted to Goode's short and concise 
analysis. See William J. Goode, Tfie Family (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice- 
Hall, 1964). 

23 Family, society, and state are three separate but connected entities: women have a 
decreasing importance as one goes from the Erst to the third category. But as each of 
the three categories exists within or is influenced by the overall institution of patriarchy, 
I am concerned here less with differentiation than with pointing out a general 
similarity. 

23 J. K. Folsom makes a convincing argument as to the anomalous character of patriar- 
chal family systems within democratic society. See Joseph K. Folsom The Fntnily and 
Democratic Society (New York: John Wiley, 1934, 1943). 

24 Marital as well as consanguine relation to the head of the family made one his 
property. 



¦ 



m 




34 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



in strict patriarchy, kinship is acknowledged only through association with 
the male line. Agnation excludes the descendants of the female line from 
property right and often even from recognition. 23 The first formulation of 
the patriarchal family was made by Sir Henry Maine, a nineteenth-century 
historian of ancient jurisprudence. Maine argues that the patriarchal basis 
of Mnship is put in terms of dominion rather than blood; wives, though out- 
siders, are assimilated into the line, while sister's sons are excluded. Basing 
his definition of the family upon the patria potestes of Rome, Maine defined 
it as follows: "The eldest male parent is absolutely supreme in his household. 
His dominion extends to life and death and is as unqualified over his chil- 
dren and their houses as over his slaves." 26 In the archaic patriarchal family 
"the group consists of animate and inanimate property, of wife, children, 
slaves, land and goods, all held together by subjection to the despotic au- 
thority of the eldest male." 27 

McLennon's rebuttal 28 to Maine argued that the Roman p atria potestes 
was an extreme form of patriarchy and by no means, as Maine had imagined, 
universal. Evidence of matrilineal societies (preliterate societies in Africa 
and elsewhere) refute Maine's assumption of the universality of agnation. 
Certainly Maine's central argument, as to the primeval or state of nature 
character of patriarchy is but a rather naif 29 rationalization of an institu- 
tion Maine tended to exalt. The assumption of patriarchy's primeval charac- 
ter is contradicted by much evidence which points to the conclusion that 
full patriarchal authority, particularly that of the patria potestes is a late de- 
velopment and the total erosion of female status was likely to be gradual as 
has been its recovery. 

In contemporary patriarchies the male's de jure priority has recently 
been modified through the granting of divorce 30 protection, citizenship, and 
property to women. Their chattel status continues in their loss of name, their 
obligation to adopt the husband's domicile, and the general legal assumption 

28 Strict patriarchal descent is traced and recognized only through male heirs rather 
than through sister's sons etc. In a few generations descendants of female branches 
lose touch. Only those who "bear the name," who descend from male branches, may 
be recognized for Mnship or inheritance. 

26 Sir Henry Maine, Ancient Law (London, Murray, i860, p. 122. 

** Sir Henry Maine, The Early History of Institutions (London), pp. 310-n. 

28 John McLennon, The Patriarchal Theory (London, Macmillan, 1885). 

29 Maine took the patriarchal family as the cell from which society evolved as gens, 
phratry, tribe, and nation grew, rather in the simplistic manner of Israel's twelve tribes 
descending from Jacob. Since Maine also dated the origin of patriarchy from the dis- 
covery of paternity, hardly a primeval condition, this too operates against the eternal 
character of patriarchal society. 

30 Many patriarchies granted divorce to males only. It has been accessible to women 
on any scale only during this century. Goode states that divorce rates were as high in 
Japan during the 1880s as they are in the U.S. today. Goode, op. cit., p. 3. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



35 



that marriage involves an exchange of the female's domestic service and (sex- 
ual) consortium in return for financial support. 31 

The chief contribution of the family in patriarchy is the socialization of 
the young (largely through the example and admonition of their parents) 
into patriarchal ideology's prescribed attitudes toward the categories of role, 
temperament, and status. Although slight differences of definition depend 
here upon the parents' grasp of cultural values, the general effect of uni- 
formity is achieved, to be further reinforced through peers, schools, media, 
and other learning sources, formal and informal. While we may niggle over 
the balance of authority between the personalities of various households, one 
must remember that the entire culture supports masculine authority in all 
areas of life and— outside of the home— permits the female none at all. 

To insure that its crucial functions of reproduction and socialization of 
the young take place only within its confines, the patriarchal family insists 
upon legitimacy. Bronislaw Malinowski describes this as "the principle of 
legitimacy" formulating it as an insistence that "no child should be brought 
into the world without a man— and one man at that— assuming the role of 
sociological father." 32 By this apparently consistent and universal prohibi- 
tion (whose penalties vary by class and in accord with the expected opera- 
tions of the double standard) patriarchy decrees that the status of both child 
and mother is primarily or ultimately dependent upon the male. And since 
it is not only his social status, but even his economic power upon which 
his dependents generally rely, the position of the masculine figure within the 
family-as without— is materially, as well as ideologically, extremely strong. 

Although there is no biological reason why the two central functions of the 
family (socialization and reproduction) need be inseparable from or even take 
place within it, revolutionary or Utopian efforts to remove these functions 
from the family have been so frustrated, so beset by difficulties, that most 
experiments so far have involved a gradual return to tradition. This is strong 
evidence of how basic a form patriarchy is within all societies, and of how 
pervasive its effects upon family members. It is perhaps also an admonition 
that change undertaken without a thorough understanding of the socio- 
political institution to be changed is hardly productive. And yet radical social 

31 Divorce is granted to a male for his wife's failure in domestic service and consor- 
tium: it is not granted him for his wife's failure to render him financial support. Divorce 
is granted to a woman if her husband fails to support her, but not for his failure at do- 
mestic service or consortium. But see Karczewsld versus Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, 
474 F. Supp. 169.175 N.D. Illinois, 196% where a precedent was set and the common 
law that decrees a wife might not sue for loss of consortium overturned. 

32 Bronislaw Malinowski, Sex, Culture and Myth (New York, Harcourt, 1962), p. 63. 
An earlier statement is even more sweeping: "In all human societies moral tradition and 
the law decree that the group consisting of a woman and her offspring is not a sociologi- 
cally complete unit." Sex and Regression in Savage Society (London, Humanities, 1917). 
p. 213. 



_ 



36 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



change cannot take place without having an effect upon patriarchy. And 
not simply because it is the political form which subordinates such a large 
percentage of the population (women and youth) but because it serves as a 
citadel of property and traditional interests. Marriages are financial alliances, 
and each household operates as an economic entity much like a corporation. 
As one student of the family states it, "the family is the keystone of the 
stratification system, the social mechanism by which it is maintained." 33 

IV Class 

It is in the area of class that the castelike status of the female within 
patriarchy is most liable to confusion, for sexual status often operates in a su- 
perficially confusing way within the variable of class. In a society where status 
is dependent upon the economic, social, and educational circumstances of 
class, it is possible for certain females to appear to stand higher than some 
males. Yet not when one looks more closely at the subject. This is perhaps 
easier to see by means of analogy: a black doctor or lawyer has higher social 
status than a poor white sharecropper. But race, itself a caste system which 
subsumes class, persuades the latter citizen that he belongs to a higher order 
of life, just as it oppresses the black professional in spirit, whatever his 
material success may be. In much the same manner, a truck driver or 
butcher has always his "manhood" to fall back upon. Should this final vanity 
he offended, he may contemplate more violent methods. The literature of 
the past thirty years provides a staggering number of incidents in which the 
caste of virility triumphs over the social status of wealthy or even educated 
women. In literary contexts one has to deal here with wish-fulfillment. Inci- 
dents from life (bullying, obscene, or hostile remarks) are probably another 
sort of psychological gesture of ascendancy. Both convey more hope than 
reality, for class divisions are generally quite impervious to the hostility of 
individuals. And yet while the existence of class division is not seriously 
threatened by such expressions of enmity, the existence of sexual hierarchy 
has been re-affirmed and mobilized to "punish" the female quite effectively. 

The function of class or ethnic mores in patriarchy is largely a matter of 
how overdy displayed or how loudly enunciated the general ethic of mas- 
culine supremacy allows itself to become. Here one is confronted by what 
appears to be a paradox: while in the lower social strata, the male is more 
likely to claim authority on the strength of his sex rank alone, he is actually 
obliged more often to share power with the women of his class who are 
economically productive; whereas in the middle and upper classes, there is less 
tendency to assert a blunt patriarchal dominance, as men who enjoy such 
status have more power in any case. 3 * 

It is generally accepted that Western patriarchy has been much softened 
by the concepts of courdy and romantic love. While this is certainly true, 

S8 Goode, op. at., p. 80. 
84 Goode, op. cit., p. 74. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



37 



such influence has also been vasdy overestimated. In comparison with the 
candor of "machismo" or oriental behavior, one realizes how much of a con- 
cession traditional chivalrous behavior represents— a sporting kind of repara- 
tion to allow the subordinate female certain means of saving face. While a 
palliative to the injustice of woman's social position, chivalry is also a tech- 
nique for disguising it. One must acknowledge that the chivalrous stance 
is a game the master group plays in elevating its subject to pedestal level. His- 
torians of courtly love stress the fact that the raptures of the poets had no 
effect upon the legal or economic standing of women, and very little upon 
their social status. 35 As the sociologist Hugo Beigel has observed, both the 
courtly and the romantic versions of love are "grants" which the male con- 
cedes out of his total powers. 38 Both have had the effect of obscuring the 
patriarchal character of Western culture and in their general tendency to 
attribute impossible virtues to women, have ended by confining them in a 
narrow and often remarkably conscribing sphere of behavior. It was a Vic- 
torian habit, for example, to insist the female assume the function of serv- 
ing as the male's conscience and living the life of goodness he found tedious 
but felt someone ought to do anyway. 

The concept of romantic love affords a means of emotional manipulation 
which the male is free to exploit, since love is the only circumstance in 
which the female is (ideologically) pardoned for sexual activity. And convic- 
tions of romantic love are convenient to both parties since this is often the 
only condition in which the female can overcome the far more powerful 
conditioning she has received toward sexual inhibition. Romantic love also 
obscures the realities of female status and the burden of economic depend- 
ency. As to "chivalry," such gallant gesture as still resides in the middle classes 
has degenerated to a tired ritualism, which scarcely serves to mask the status 
situation of the present. 

Within patriarchy one must often deal with contradictions which are 
simply a matter of class style. David Riesman has noted that as the work- 
ing class has been assimilated into the middle class, so have its sexual mores 
and attitudes. The fairly blatant male chauvinism which was once a prov- 
ince of the lower class or immigrant male has been absorbed and taken on a 
certain glamour through a number of contemporary figures, who have 
made it, and a certain number of other working-class male attitudes, part of 
a new, and at the moment, fashionable life style. So influential is this working- 
class ideal of brute virility (or more accurately, a literary and therefore 

36 This is the gist of Valency's summary of the situation before the troubadours, ac- 
knowledging that courtly love is an utter anomaly: "With regaid to the social back- 
ground, all that can be stated with conBdence is that we know nothing of the objective 
relationships of men and women in the Middle Ages which might conceivably motivate 
the strain of love-poetry which the troubadours developed." Maurice Valency, In Praise 
of Love (Macmiuan, New York, 1958), p. 5. 

86 Hugo Beigel, "Romantic Love," The American Sociological Review, Vol. 16, 1951, 
P- 331- 




1 1 1 



38 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



middle-class version of it) become in our time that it may replace more 
discreet and "gentlemanly" attitudes of the past. 37 

One of the chief effects of class within patriarchy is to set one woman 
against another, in the past creating a lively antagonism between whore and 
matron, and in the present between career woman and housewife. One 
envies the other her "security" and prestige, while the envied yearns beyond 
the confines of respectability for what she takes to be the other's freedom, 
adventure, and contact with the great world. Through the multiple advan- 
tages of the double standard, the male participates in both worlds, empow- 
ered by his superior social and economic resources to play the estranged 
women against each other as rivals. One might also recognize subsidiary 
status categories among women: not only is virtue class, but beauty and age 
as well. 

Perhaps, in the final analysis, it is possible to argue that women tend to 
transcend the usual class stratifications in patriarchy, for whatever the class 
of her birth and education, the female has fewer permanent class associa- 
tions than does the male. Economic dependency renders her affiliations with 
any class a tangential, vicarious, and temporary matter. Aristotle observed 
that the only slave to whom a commoner might lay claim was his woman, 
and the service of an unpaid domestic still provides working-class males with 
a "cushion" against the buffets of the class system which incidentally provides 
them with some of the psychic luxuries of the leisure class. Thrown upon 
their own resources, few women rise above working class in personal prestige 
and economic power, and women as a group do not enjoy many of the in- 
terests and benefits any class may offer its male members. Women have there- 
fore less of an investment in the class system. But it is important to under- 
stand that as with any group whose existence is parasitic to its rulers, women 
are a dependency class who live on surplus. And their marginal life fre- 
quently renders them conservative, for like all persons in their situation 
(slaves are a classic example here) they identify their own survival with the 
prosperity of those who feed them. The hope of seeking liberating radical 
solutions of their own seems too remote for the majority to dare contemplate 
and remains so until consciousness on the subject is raised. 

As race is emerging as one of the final variables in sexual politics, it is 
pertinent, especially in a discussion of modern literature, to devote a few 
words to it as well. Traditionally, the white male has been accustomed to 
concede the female of his own race, in her capacity as "his woman" a higher 

37 Mailer and Miller occur to one in this connection, and Lawrence as well. One 
might trace Rojack's very existence as a fictional figure to the virility symbol of Jack 
London's Ernest Everhard or Tennessee Williams' Stanley Kowalski. That Rojack is 
also literate is nothing more than an elegant finish upon the furniture of his "manhood" 
solidly based in the hard oaken grain of his mastery over any and every "broad" he can 
better, bludgeon, or bugger. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



39 



status than that ascribed to the black male. 38 Yet as white racist ideology is 
exposed and begins to erode, racism's older protective attitudes toward 
(white) women also begin to give way. And the priorities of maintaining 
male supremacy might outweigh even those of white supremacy; sexism may 
be more endemic in our own society than racism. For example, one notes 
in authors whom we would now term overtly racist, such as D. H. Lawrence 
—whose contempt for what he so often designates as inferior breeds is un- 
abashed-instances where the lower-caste male is brought on to master or 
humiliate the white man's own insubordinate mate. Needless to say, the fe- 
male of the non-white races does not figure in such tales save as an exemplum 
of "true" womanhood's servility, worthy of imitation by other less carefully in- 
structed females. Contemporary white sociology often operates under a sim- 
ilar patriarchal bias when its rhetoric inclines toward the assertion that the 
"matriarchal" (e.g. matrifocal) aspect of black society and the "castration" of 
the black male are the most deplorable symptoms of black oppression in white 
racist society, with the implication that racial inequity is capable of solution 
by a restoration of masculine authority. Whatever the facts of the matter may 
be, it can also be suggested that analysis of this kind presupposes patriarchal 
values without questioning them, and tends to obscure both the true char- 
acter of and the responsibility for racist injustice toward black humanity of 
both sexes. 

V Economic and Educational 

One of the most efficient branches of patriarchal government lies in the 
agency of its economic hold over its female subjects. In traditional patri- 
archy, women, as non-persons without legal standing, were permitted no 
actual economic existence as they could neither own nor earn in their own 
right. Since women have always worked in patriarchal societies, often at the 
most routine or strenuous tasks, what is at issue here is not labor but eco- 
nomic reward. In modern reformed patriarchal societies, women have cer- 
tain economic rights, yet the "woman's work" in which some two thirds of 
the female population in most developed countries are engaged is work that is 

38 It would appear that the "pure flower of white womanhood" has at least at times 
been something of a disappointment to her lord as a fellow-racist. The historic con- 
nection of the Abolitionist and the Woman's Movement is some evidence of this, as 
well as the incidence of white female and black male marriages as compared with those 
of white male and black female. Figures on miscegenation are very difficult to obtain: 
Goode (op. cit., p. 37) estimates the proportion of white women marrying black men 
to be between 3 to 10 times the proportion of white men marrying black women. Robert 
K. Merton "Intermarriage and the Social Structure" Psychiatry, Vol. 4, August 1941, 
p. 374, states that "most intercaste sex relations— not marriages— are between white 
men and Negro women." It is hardly necessary to emphasize that the more extensive 
sexual contacts between white males and black females have not only been extramarital, 
but (on the part of the white male) crassly exploitative. Under slavery it was simply a 
case of rape. 



¦1 



fl 




40 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



not paid for. 39 In a money economy where autonomy and prestige depend 
upon currency, this is a fact of great importance. In general, the position 
of women in patriarchy is a continuous function of their economic depend- 
ence. Just as their social position is vicarious and achieved (often on a tem- 
porary or marginal basis) through males, their relation to the economy is 
also typically vicarious or tangential. 

Of that third of women who are employed, their average wages represent 
only half of the average income enjoyed by men. These are the U. S. De- 
partment of Labor statistics for average year-round income: white male, 
$6704, non-white male $4277, white female, $3991, and non-white female 
$28 i6. 4C The disparity is made somewhat more remarkable because the educa- 
tional level of women is generally higher than that of men in comparable 
income brackets. 41 Further, the kinds of employment open to women in 
modern patriarchies are, with few exceptions, menial, ill paid and without 
status. 42 

In modern capitalist countries women also function as a reserve labor force, 
enlisted in times of war and expansion and discharged in times of peace and 
recession. In this role American women have replaced immigrant labor and 
now compete with the racial minorities. In socialist countries the female 
labor force is generally in the lower ranks as well, despite a high incidence 
of women in certain professions such as medicine. The status and rewards 
of such professions have declined as women enter them, and they are per- 
mitted to enter such areas under a rationale that society or the state (and 
socialist countries are also patriarchal) rather than woman is served by such 
activity. 

Since woman's independence in economic life is viewed with distrust, 
prescriptive agencies of all kinds (religion, psychology, advertising, etc.) 

38 Sweden is an exception in considering housework a material service rendered and 
calculable in divorce suits etc. Thirty-three to forty per cent of the female population 
have market employment in Western countries: this leaves up to two thirds out of the 
market labor force. In Sweden and the Soviet Union that figure is lower. 

40 U. S. Department of Labor Statistics for 1966 (latest available figures). The pro- 
portion of women earning more than $10,000 a year in 1966 was 7/10 of 1%. See 
Mary Dublin Keyserling, "Realities of Women's Current Position in the Labor Force" 
in Sex Discrimination in Employment Practices, a report from the conference (pamphlet) 
University extension, U.C.L.A. and the Women's Bureau, September 19, rg68. 

41 See The 1965 Handbook on Women Workers, United States Department of Labor, 
Women's Bureau: "In every major occupational group the median wage or salary income 
of women was less than that of men. This is true at all levels of educational attainment." 
A comparison of the income received by women and men with equal amounts of school- 
ing revealed that women who had completed four years of college received incomes which 
were only 47% of those paid to men with the same educational training; high school grad- 
uates earned only 38%, and grade school graduates only 33%. 

42 For the distribution of women in lower income and lower status positions see 
Background Facts on Working Women (pamphlet) U. S. Department of Labor, 
Women's Bureau. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



41 



continuously admonish or even inveigh against the employment of middle- 
class women, particularly mothers. The toil of working-class women is more 
readily accepted as "need," if not always by the working-class itself, at least 
by the middle-class. And to be sure, it serves the purpose of making available 
cheap labor in factory and lower-grade service and clerical positions. Its 
wages and tasks are so unremunerative that, unlike more prestigious em- 
ployment for women, it fails to threaten patriarchy financially or psycho- 
logically. Women who are employed have two jobs since the burden of 
domestic service and child care is unrelieved either by day care or other social 
agencies, or by the co-operation of husbands. The invention of labor-saving 
devices has had no appreciable effect on the duration, even if it has affected 
the quality of their drudgery. 43 Discrimination in matters of hiring, ma- 
ternity, wages and hours is very great. 44 In the U. S. a recent Jaw forbidding 
discrimination in employment, the first and only federal legislative guarantee 
of rights granted to American women since the vote, is not enforced, has not 
been enforced since its passage, and was not enacted to be enforced. 45 

In terms of industry and production, the situation of women is in many 
ways comparable both to colonial and to pre-industrial peoples. Although 
they achieved their first economic autonomy in the industrial revolution 
and now constitute a large and underpaid factory population, women do not 
participate directly in technology or in production. What they customarily 
produce (domestic and personal service) has no market value and is, as it 
were, pre-capital. Nor, where they do participate in production of commodi 
ties through employment, do they own or control or even comprehend the 
process in which they participate. An example might make this clearer: the 
refrigerator is a machine all women use, some assemble it in factories, and 
a very few with scientific education understand its principles of operation. 
Yet the heavy industries which roll its steel and produce the dies for its parts 
are in male hands. The same is true of the typewriter, the auto, etc. Now, 
while knowledge is fragmented even among the male population, collectively 
they could reconstruct any technological device. But in the absence of 
males, women's distance from technology today is sufficiendy great that it is 
doubtful that they could replace or repair such machines on any significant 
scale. Woman's distance from higher technology is even greater: large-scale 

4 3 "For a married woman without children the irreducible minimum of work probably 
takes between fifteen to twenty hours a week, for a woman with small children the 
minimum is probably 70-80 hours a week." Margaret Benston, "The Political Economy 
of Women's Liberation," Monthly Review, Vol, XXI, September 1969. 

44 See the publications of the Women's Bureau and particularly Sex Discrimination 
jjt Employment Practices (op. cit.) and Carolyn Bird, Born Female (New York: McKay, 
1968). 

45 Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. The inclusion of "sex" in the law up- 
holding the civil right of freedom from discrimination in employment was half a joke 
and half an attempt on the part of Southern congressmen to force Northern indus- 
trial states to abandon passage of the bill. 




4 2 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



building construction; the development of computers; the moon shot, occur 
as further examples. If knowledge is power, power is also knowledge, and a 
large factor in their subordinate position is the fairly systematic ignorance 
patriarchy imposes upon women. 

Since education and economy are so closely related in the advanced na- 
tions, it is significant that the general level and style of higher education 
for women, particularly in their many remaining segregated institutions, 
is closer to that of Renaissance humanism than to the skills of mid-twentieth- 
century scientific and technological society. Traditionally patriarchy per- 
mitted occasional minimal literacy to women while higher education was 
closed to them. While modern patriarchies have, fairly recently, opened all 
educational levels to women, 46 the kind and quality of education is not the 
same for each sex. This difference is of course apparent in early socialization, 
but it persists and enters into higher education as well. Universities, once 
places of scholarship and the training of a few professionals, now also pro- 
duce the personnel of a technocracy. This is not the case with regard to 
women. Their own colleges typically produce neither scholars nor profes- 
sionals nor technocrats. Nor are they funded by government and corporations 
as are male colleges and those co-educational colleges and universities whose 
primary function is the education of males. 

As patriarchy enforces a temperamental imbalance of personality traits 
between the sexes, its educational institutions, segregated or co-educational, 
accept a cultural programing toward the generally operative division between 
"masculine" and "feminine" subject matter, assigning the humanities and 
certain social sciences (at least in their lower or marginal branches) to the 
female — and science and technology, the professions, business and engineer- 
ing to the male. Of course the balance of employment, prestige and reward 
at present lie with the latter. Control of these fields is very eminently a 
matter of political power. One might also point out how the exclusive domi- 
nance of males in the more prestigious fields directly serves the interests of 
patriarchal power in industry, government, and the military. And since patri- 
archy encourages an imbalance in human temperament along sex lines, 
both divisions of learning (science and the humanities) reflect this im- 
balance. The humanities, because not exclusively male, suffer in prestige: 

48 We often forget how recent an event is higher education for women. In the U.S. 
it is barely one hundred years old; in many Western countries barely fiFty. Oxford did 
not grant degrees to women on the same terms as to men until 1920. In Japan and a 
number of other countries universities have been open to women only in the period 
after World War II. There are still areas where higher education for women scarcely 
exists. Women do not have the same access to education as do men. The Princeton 
Report stated that "although at the high school level more girls than boys receive grades 
of "A," roughly 50% more boys than girls go to college." The Princeton Report to 
the Alumni on Co-Education (pamphlet), Princeton, N.J, 1968, p. 10. Most other au- 
thorities give the national ratio of college students as two males to one female. In a 
great many countries it is far lower. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



43 



the sciences, technology, and business, because they are nearly exclusively 
male reflect the deformation of the "masculine" personality, e.g., a certain 
predatory or aggressive character. 

In keeping with the inferior sphere of culture to which women in patri- 
archy have always been restricted, the present encouragement of their "ar- 
tistic" interests through study of the humanities is hardly more than an ex- 
tension of the "accomplishments" they once cultivated in preparation for the 
marriage market. Achievement in the arts and humanities is reserved, now, 
as it has been historically, for males. Token representation, be it Susan Son- 
tag's or Lady Murasaki's, does not vitiate this rule, 

VI Force 

We are not accustomed to associate patriarchy with force. So perfect is its 
system of socialization, so complete the general assent to its values, so long 
and so universally has it prevailed in human society, that it scarcely seems 
to require violent implementation. Customarily, we view its brutalities in the 
past as exotic or "primitive" custom. Those of the present are regarded as the 
product of individual deviance, confined to pathological or exceptional be- 
havior, and without general import. And yet, just as under other total ide- 
ologies (racism and colonialism are somewhat analogous in this respect) 
control in patriarchal society would be imperfect, even inoperable, unless it 
had the rule of force to rely upon, both in emergencies and as an ever-present 
instrument of intimidation. 

Historically, most patriarchies have institutionalized force through their 
legal systems. For example, strict patriarchies such as that of Islam, have im- 
plemented the prohibition against illegitimacy or sexual autonomy with a 
death sentence. In Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia the adulteress is still stoned 
to death with a mullah presiding at the execution. Execution by stoning was 
once common practice through the Near East. It is still condoned in Sicily. 
Needless to say there was and is no penalty imposed upon the male core- 
spondent. Save in recent times or exceptional cases, adultery was not gen- 
erally recognized in males except as an offense one male might commit 
against another's property interest. In Tokugawa Japan, for example, an 
elaborate set of legal distinctions were made according to class. A samurai was 
entitled, and in the face of public knowledge, even obliged, to execute an 
adulterous wife, whereas a chonin (common citizen) or peasant might re- 
spond as he pleased. In cases of cross-class adultery, the lower-class male 
convicted of sexual intimacy with his employer's wife would, because he had 
violated taboos of class and property, be beheaded together with her. Upper- 
strata males had, of course, the same license to seduce lower-class women as 
we are familiar with in Western societies. 

Indirectly, one form of "death penalty" still obtains even in America today. 
Patriarchal legal systems in depriving women of control over their own 



L 



44 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



bodies drive them to illegal abortions; it is estimated that between two and 
five thousand women die each year from this cause. 47 

Excepting a social license to physical abuse among certain class and ethnic 
groups, force is diffuse and generalized in most contemporary patriarchies. 
Significantly, force itself is restricted to the male who alone is psychologically 
and technically equipped to perpetrate physical violence, 48 Where differences 
in physical strength have become immaterial through the use of arms, the 
female is rendered innocuous by her socialization. Before assault she is almost 
universally defenseless both by her physical and emotional training. Need- 
less to say, this has the most far-reaching effects on the social and psycho- 
logical behavior of both sexes. 

Patriarchal force also relies on a form of violence particularly sexual in 
character and realized most completely in the act of rape. The figures of 
rapes reported represent only a fraction of those which occur, 1 " as the 
"shame" of the event is sufficient to deter women from the notion of civil 
prosecution under the public circumstances of a trial. Traditionally rape has 
been viewed as an offense one male commits upon another— a matter of abus- 
ing "his woman." Vendetta, such as occurs in the American South, is carried 
out for masculine satisfaction, the exhilarations of race hatred, and the in- 
terests of property and vanity (honor). In rape, the emotions of aggression, 
hatred, contempt, and the desire to break or violate personality, take a form 
consummately appropriate to sexual politics. In the passages analyzed at the 
outset of this study, such emotions were present at a barely sublimated level 
and were a key factor in explaining the attitude behind the author's use of 
language and tone. 50 

Patriarchal societies typically link feelings of cruelty with sexuality, the 
latter often equated both with evil and with power. This is apparent both in 
the sexual fantasy reported by psychoanalysis and that reported by pornog- 
raphy. The rule here associates sadism with the male ("the masculine role") 
and victimization with the female ("the feminine role"). 61 Emotional re- 
sponse to violence against women in patriarchy is often curiously ambivalent; 

1T Since abortion is extralegal, figures are difficult to obtain. This figure is based on 
the estimates of abortionists and referral services. Suicides in pregnancy are not officially 
reported either. 

48 Vivid exceptions come to mind in the wars of liberation conducted by Vietnam, 
China, etc. But through most of history, women have been unarmed and forbidden to 
exhibit any defense of their own. 

"* 8 They are still high. The number of rapes reported in the city of New York in 1967 
was 2.432. Figure supplied by Police Department. 

50 It is interesting that male victims of rape at the hands of other males often feel twice 
imposed upon, as they have not only been subjected to forcible and painful intercourse, 
but further abused in being reduced to the status of a female. Much of this is evident in 
Genet and in the contempt homosexual society reserves for its "passive" or "female" 
partners. 

61 Masculine masochism is regarded as exceptional and often explained as latently 
homosexual, or a matter of the subject playing "the female role"— e.g., victim. 




THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



45 



references to wife-beating, for example, invariably produce laughter and some 
embarrassment. Exemplary atrocity, such as the mass murders committed by 
Richard Speck, greeted at one level with a certain scandalized, possibly hypo- 
critical indignation, is capable of eliciting a mass response of titillation at 
another level. At such times one even hears from men occasional expressions 
of envy or amusement. In view of the sadistic character of such public fantasy 
as caters to male audiences in pornography or semi-pornographic media, one 
might expect that a certain element of identification is by no means absent 
from the general response. Probably a similar collective frisson sweeps 
through racist society when its more "logical" members have perpetrated a 
lynching. Unconsciously, both crimes may serve the larger group as a ritual 
act, cafhartic in effect. 

Hostility is expressed in a number of ways. One is laughter. Misogynist 
literature, the primary vehicle of masculine hostility, is both an hortatory and 
comic genre. Of all artistic forms in patriarchy it is the most frankly propa- 
gandists. Its aim is to reinforce both sexual factions in their status. Ancient, 
Medieval, and Renaissance literature in the West has each had a large ele- 
ment of misogyny. 62 Nor is the East without a strong tradition here, notably 
in the Confucian strain which held sway in Japan as well as China. The 
Western tradition was indeed moderated somewhat by the introduction of 
courtly love. But the old diatribes and attacks were coterminous with the new 
idealization of woman. In the case of Petrarch, Boccaccio, and some others, 
one can find both attitudes fully expressed, presumably as evidence of dif- 
ferent moods, a courtly pose adopted for the ephemeral needs of the vernacu- 
lar, a grave animosity for sober and eternal Latin. 63 As courtly love was 
transformed to romantic love, literary misogyny grew somewhat out of fash- 
ion. In some places in the eighteenth century it declined into ridicule and ex- 
hortative satire. In the nineteenth century its more acrimonious forms almost 
disappeared in English. Its resurrection in twentieth-century attitudes and 
literature is the result of a resentment over patriarchal reform, aided by the 
growing permissiveness in expression which has taken place at an increasing 
rate in the last fifty years. 

Since the abatement of censorship, masculine hostility (psychological or 
physical) in specifically sexual contexts has become far more apparent. Yet as 
masculine hostility has been fairly continuous, one deals here probably less 
with a matter of increase than with a new frankness in expressing hostility 
in specifically sexual contexts. It is a matter of release and freedom to express 

BB The literature of misogyny is so vast that no summary of sensible proportions could 
do it justice. The best reference on the subject is Katherine M. Rogers, The Troublesome 
Helpmate, A History of Misogyny in Literature (Seattle, University of Washington 
Press, 1966). 

63 As well as the exquisite sonnets of love, Petrarch composed satires on women as the 
"De Remediis utriusque Fortunae" and Epistolse Seniles. Boccaccio too could balance the 
chivalry of romances (Filostrato, Ameto, and Fiammetta) with the vituperance of Cor- 
baccio, a splenetic attack on women more than medieval in violence. 



46 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



what was once forbidden expression outside of pornography or other "un- 
derground" productions, such as those of De Sade. As one recalls both the 
euphemism and the idealism of descriptions of coitus in the Romantic poets 
(Keats's Eve of St. Agnes'), or the Victorian novelists (Hardy, for example) 
and contrasts it with Miller or William Burroughs, one has an idea of how 
contemporary literature has absorbed not only the truthful explicitness of 
pornography, but its anti-social character as well. Since this tendency to hurt 
or insult has been given free expression, it has become far easier to assess 
sexual antagonism in the male. 

The history of patriarchy presents a variety of cruelties and barbarities: 
the suttee execution in India, the crippling deformity of footbinding in 
China, the lifelong ignominy of the veil in Islam, or the widespread persecu- 
tion of sequestration, the gynacium, and purdah. Phenomenon such as 
clitoroidectomy, clitoral incision, the sale and enslavement of women under 
one guise or another, involuntary and child marriages, concubinage and 
prostitution, still take place— the first in Africa, the latter in the Near and 
Far East, the last generally. The rationale which accompanies that imposi- 
tion of male authority euphemistically referred to as "the battle of the sexes" 
bears a certain resemblance to the formulas of nations at war, where any 
heinousness is justified on the grounds that the enemy is either an inferior 
species or really not human at all. The patriarchal mentality has concocted 
a whole series of rationales about women which accomplish this purpose 
tolerably well. And these traditional beliefs still invade our consciousness 
and affect our thinking to an extent few of us would be willing to admit. 

VII Anthropological: Myth and Religion 

Evidence from anthropology, religious and literary myth all attests to the 
politically expedient character of patriarchal convictions about women. One 
anthropologist refers to a consistent patriarchal strain of assumption that 
"woman's biological differences set her apart ... she is essentially inferior," 
and since "human institutions grow from deep and primal anxieties and are 
shaped by irrational psychological mechanisms . . . socially organized at- 
titudes toward women arise from basic tensions expressed by the male." 54 
Under patriarchy the female did not herself develop the symbols by which 
she is described. As both the primitive and the civilized worlds are male 
worlds, the ideas which shaped culture in regard to the female were also of 
male design. The image of women as we know it is an image created by 
men and fashioned to suit their needs. These needs spring from a fear of the 
"otherness" of woman. Yet this notion itself presupposes that patriarchy has 
already been established and the male has already set himself as the human 
norm, the subject and referent to which the female is "other" or alien. What- 

54 H. R, Hays, The Dangerous Sex, the Myth of Feminine Evil (New York: Putnam, 
1964). Much of my summary in this section is indebted to Hays's useful assessment of 
cultural notions about the female. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 47 

ever its origin, the function of the male's sexual antipathy is to provide a 
means of control over a subordinate group and a rationale which justifies the 
inferior station of those in a lower order, "explaining" the oppression of 
their lives. 

The feeling that woman's sexual functions are impure is both world-wide 
and persistent. One sees evidence of it everywhere in literature, in myth, in 
primitive and civilized life. It is striking how the notion persists today. The 
event of menstruation, for example, is a largely clandestine affair, and the 
psycho-social effect of the stigma attached must have great effect on the fe- 
male ego. There is a large anthropological literature on menstrua] taboo; 
the practice of isolating offenders in huts at the edge of the village occurs 
throughout the primitive world. Contemporary slang denominates menstrua- 
tion as "the curse." There is considerable evidence that such discomfort as 
women suffer during their period is often likely to be psychosomatic, rather 
than physiological, cultural rather than biological, in origin. That this may 
also be true to some extent of labor and delivery is attested to by the recent 
experiment with "painless childbirth." Patriarchal circumstances and beliefs 
seem to have the effect of poisoning the female's own sense of physical self 
until it often truly becomes the burden it is said to be. 

Primitive peoples explain the phenomenon of the female's genitals in terms 
of a wound, sometimes reasoning that she was visited by a bird or snake and 
mutilated into her present condition. Once she was wounded, now she 
bleeds. Contemporary slang for the vagina is "gash." The Freudian descrip- 
tion of the female genitals is in terms of a "castrated" condition. The un- 
easiness and disgust female genitals arouse in patriarchal societies is attested 
to through religious, cultural, and literary proscription. In preliterate groups 
fear is also a factor, as in the belief in a castrating vagina dentata. The penis, 
badge of the male's superior status in both preliterate and civilized patri- 
archies, is given the most crucial significance, the subject both of endless 
boasting and endless anxiety. 

Nearly all patriarchies enforce taboos against women touching ritual ob- 
jects (those of war or religion) or food. In ancient and preliterate societies 
women are generally not permitted to eat with men. Women eat apart today 
in a great number of cultures, chiefly those of the Near and Far East. Some 
of the inspiration of such custom appears to lie in fears of contamination, 
probably sexual in origin. In their function of domestic servants, females 
are forced to prepare food, yet at the same time may be liable to spread their 
contagion through it. A similar situation obtains with blacks in the United 
States. They are considered filthy and infectious, yet as domestics they are 
forced to prepare food for their queasy superiors. In both cases the dilemma 
is generally solved in a deplorably illogical fashion by segregating the act of 
eating itself, while cooking is earned on out of sight by the very group who 
would infect the table. With an admirable consistency, some Hindu males do 
not permit their wives to touch their food at all. In nearly every patriarchal 



48 




SEXUAL POLITICS 



group it is expected that the dominant male will eat first or eat better, and 
even where the sexes feed together, the male shall be served by the female. 55 

All patriarchies have hedged virginity and defloration in elaborate rites 
and interdictions. Among preliterates virginity presents an interesting prob- 
lem in ambivalence. On the one hand, it is, as in every patriarchy, a mysteri- 
ous good because a sign of property received intact. On the other hand, it 
represents an unknown evil associated with the mana of blood and terrify- 
ingly "other," So auspicious is the event of defloration that in many tribes the 
owner-groom is willing to relinquish breaking the seal of his new possession 
to a stronger or older personality who can neutralize the attendant dangers. 58 
Fears of defloration appear to originate in a fear of the alien sexuality of the 
female. Although any physical suffering endured in defloration must be on 
the part of the female (and most societies cause her— bodily and mentally— to 
suffer anguish), the social interest, institutionalized in patriarchal ritual and 
custom, is exclusively on the side of the male's property interest, prestige, or 
(among preliterates) hazard. 

Patriarchal myth typically posits a golden age before the arrival of women, 
while its social practices permit males to be relieved of female company. Sex- 
ual segregation is so prevalent in patriarchy that one encounters evidence of 
it everywhere. Nearly every powerful circle in contemporary patriarchy is a 
men's group. But men form groups of their own on every level. Women's 
groups are typically auxiliary in character, imitative of male efforts and meth- 
ods on a generally trivial or ephemeral plane. They rarely operate without 
recourse to male authority, church or religious groups appealing to the su- 
perior authority of a cleric, political groups to male legislators, etc. 

In sexually segregated situations the distinctive quality of culturally en- 
forced temperament becomes very vivid. This is particularly true of those ex- 
clusively masculine organizations which anthropology generally refers to as 
men's house institutions. The men's house is a fortress of patriarchal as- 
sociation and emotion. Men's houses in preliterate society strengthen mascu- 
line communal experience through dances, gossip, hospitality, recreation, and 
religious ceremony. They are also the arsenals of male weaponry. 

David Riesman has pointed out that sports and some other activities pro- 
vide males with a supportive solidarity which society does not trouble to 
provide for females. 57 While hunting, politics, religion, and commerce may 
play a role, sport and warfare are consistently the chief cement of men's 

50 The luxury conditions of the "better" restaurant affords a quaint exception. There 
not only the cuisine but even the table service is conducted by males, at an expense 
commensurate with such an occasion. 

ne See Sigmund Freud, Totem and Taboo, and Ernest Crawley, The Mystic Rose 
(London, Methuen, 1902, 1927). 

57 David Riesman, "Two Generations," in The Woman in America, edited hy Robert 
Ltfton ([Boston, Beacon, 1967). See also James Coleman, The Adolescent Society. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



49 



house comradery. Scholars of men's house culture from Hutton Webster and 
Heinrich Schurtz to Lionel Tiger tend to be sexual patriots whose aim is 
to justify the apartheid the institution represents. 58 Schurtz believes an 
innate gregariousness and a drive toward fraternal pleasure among peers 
urges the male away from the inferior and constricting company of women. 
Notwithstanding his conviction that a mystical "bonding instinct" exists in 
males, Tiger exhorts the public, by organized effort, to preserve the men's 
house tradition from its decline. The institution's less genial function as 
power center within a state of sexual antagonism is an aspect of the phe- 
nomenon which often goes unnoticed. 

The men's houses of Melanesia fulfill a variety of purposes and are both 
armory and the site of masculine ritual initiation ceremony. Their atmosphere 
is not very remote from that of military institutions in the modern world; 
they reek of physical exertion, violence, the aura of the kill, and the throb 
of homosexual sentiment. They are the scenes of scarification, headhunting 
celebrations, and boasting sessions, Here young men are to be "hardened" 
into manhood. In the men's houses boys have such low status they are often 
called the "wives" of their initiators, the term "wife" implying both inferi- 
ority and the status of sexual object. Untried youths become the erotic in- 
terest of their elders and betters, a relationship also encountered in the 
Samurai order, in oriental priesthood, and in the Greek gymnasium. Prelit- 
erate wisdom decrees that while inculcating the young with the masculine 
ethos, it is necessary first to intimidate them with the tutelary status of the 
female. An anthropologist's comment on Melanesian men's houses is applica- 
ble equally to Genet's underworld, or Mailer's U. S. Army: "It would seem 
that the sexual brutalizing of the young boy and the effort to turn him into a 
woman both enhances the older warrior's desire of power, gratifies his sense of 
hostility toward the maturing male competitor, and eventually, when he takes 
him into the male group, strengthens the male solidarity in its symbolic at- 
tempt to do without women." 89 The derogation of feminine status in lesser 
males is a consistent patriarchal trait. Like any hazing procedure, initiation 
once endured produces devotees who will ever after be ardent initiators, hap- 
pily inflicting their own former sufferings on the newcomer. 

The psychoanalytic term for the generalized adolescent tone of men's 
house culture is "phallic state." Citadels of virility, they reinforce the most 
saliently power-oriented characteristics of patriarchy. The Hungarian psy- 
choanalytic anthropologist Geza R6heim stressed the patriarchal character 
of men's bouse organization in the preliterate tribes he studied, defining 
their communal and religious practices in terms of a "group of men united in 
the cult of an object that is a materialized penis and excluding the women 

68 Heinrich Schurtz, Altersklassen und Mannerbimde (Berlin, 1902), and Lionel 
Tiger, op. cit. 

59 Hays, TJie Dangerous Sex, p. 56. 



i 




5° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



from their society." 00 The tone and ethos of men's house culture is sadistic, 
power-oriented, and latently homosexual, frequendy narcissistic in its energy 
and motives. 01 The men's house inference that the penis is a weapon, end- 
lessly equated with other weapons, is also clear. The practice of castrating 
prisoners is itself a comment on the cultural confusion of anatomy and status 
with weaponry. Much of the glamorization of masculine comradery in war- 
fare originates in what one might designate as "the men's house sensibility." 
Its sadistic and brutalizing aspects are disguised in military glory and a par- 
ticularly cloying species of masculine sentimentality. A great deal of our 
culture partakes of this tradition, and one might locate its first statement in 
Western literature in the heroic intimacy of Patroclus and Achilles. Its de- 
velopment can be traced through the epic and the saga to the chanson de 
geste. The tradition still flourishes in war novel and movie, not to mention 
the comic book. 

Considerable sexual activity does take place in the men's house, all of it, 
needless to say, homosexual. But the taboo against homosexual behavior Cat 
least among equals) is almost universally of far stronger force than the im- 
pulse and tends to effect a rechanneling of the libido into violence. This 
association of sexuality and violence is a particularly militaristic habit of 
mind. 02 The negative and militaristic coloring of such men's house homo- 
sexuality as does exist, is of course by no means the whole character of homo- 
sexual sensibility. Indeed, the warrior caste of mind with its ultravirility, is 
more incipiently homosexual, in its exclusively male orientation, than it is 
overtly homosexual, (The Nazi experience is an extreme case in point here.) 
And the heterosexual role-playing indulged in, and still more persuasively, 
the contempt in which the younger, softer, or more "feminine" members are 
held, is proof that the actual ethos is misogynist, or perversely rather than 
positively heterosexual. The true inspiration of men's house association 
therefore comes from the patriarchal situation rather than from any circum- 
stances inherent in the homo-amorous relationship. 

If a positive attitude toward heterosexual love is not quite, in Seignebos* 
famous dictum, the invention of the twelfth century, it can still claim to be 
a novelty. Most patriarchies go to great length to exclude love as a basis of 
mate selection. Modern patriarchies tend to do so through class, ethnic, and 
religious factors. Western classical thought was prone to see in heterosexual 
love either a fatal stroke of ill luck bound to end in tragedy, or a contempti- 

«o Geza IWheim, "Psychoanalysis of Primitive Cultural Types," International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis Vol. XIII, London, 1932. 

61 All these traits apply in some degree to the bohemian circle which Miller's novels 
project, the Army which never leaves Mailer's consciousness, and the homosexual sub- 
culture on which Genet's observations are based. Since these three subjects of our study 
are closely associated with the separatist men's house culture, it is useful to give it special 
attention. 

62 Genet demonstrates this in The Screens; Mailer reveals it everywhere. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



Si 



ble and brutish consorting with inferiors. Medieval opinion was firm in its 
conviction that love was sinful if sexual, and sex sinful if loving. 

Primitive society practices its misogyny in terms of taboo and mana which 
evolve into explanatory myth. In historical cultures, this is transformed into 
ethical, then literary, and in the modem period, scientific rationalizations for 
the sexual politic. Myth is, of course, a felicitous advance in the level of 
propaganda, since it so often bases its arguments on ethics or theories of ori- 
gins. The two leading myths of Western culture are the classical tale of Pan- 
dora's box and the Biblical story of the Fall. In both cases earlier mana 
concepts of feminine evil have passed through a final literary pbase to become 
highly influential ethical justifications of things as they are. 

Pandora appears to be a discredited version of a Mediterranean fertility 
goddess, for in Hesiod's Theogony she wears a wreath of flowers and a sculp- 
tured diadem in which are carved all the creatures of land and sea. 63 
Hesiod ascribes to her the introduction of sexuality which puts an end to the 
golden age when "the races of men had been living on earth free from all 
evils, free from laborious work, and free from all wearing sickness," 04 Pan- 
dora was the origin of "the damnable race of women— a plague which men 
must live with." e5 The introduction of what are seen to be the evils of the 
male human condition came through the introduction of the female and what 
is said to be her unique product, sexuality. In Works and Days Hesiod 
elaborates on Pandora and what she represents— a perilous temptation 
with "the mind of a bitch and a thievish nature," full of "the cruelty of desire 
and longings that wear out the body," 'lies and cunning words and a deceit- 
ful soul," a snare sent by Zeus to be "the ruin of men." 69 

Patriarchy has God on its side. One of its most effective agents of control 
is the powerfully expeditious character of its doctrines as to the nature and 
origin of the female and the attribution to her alone of the dangers and 
evils it imputes to sexuality. The Greek example is interesting here: when 
it wishes to exalt sexuality it celebrates fertility through the phallus; when it 
wishes to denigrate sexuality, it cites Pandora. Patriarchal religion and ethics 
tend to lump the female and sex together as if the whole burden of the onus 
and stigma it attaches to sex were the fault of the female alone. Thereby sex, 
which is known to be unclean, sinful, and debilitating, pertains to the fe- 

63 Wherever one stands in the long anthropologists' quarrel over patriarchal versus 
matriarchal theories of social origins, one can trace a demotion of fertility goddesses and 
their replacement by patriarchal deities at a certain period throughout ancient culture. 

64 Hesiod, Works and Days, translated by Richmond Lattimore (University of Michi- 
gan. 1959), P- 19- 

66 Hesiod, Theogony, translated by Norman O. Brown (Indianapolis, Liberal Arts 
Press, 1953), p. 70. 

68 Hesiod, Works and Days, phrases from lines 53-roo. Some of the phrases are from 
Lattimore's translation, some from A. W. Mair's translation (Oxford, 1908). 




52 SEXUAL POLITICS 

male, and the male identity is preserved as a human, rather than a sexual 
one. 

The Pandora myth is one of two important Western archetypes which 
condemn the female through her sexuality and explain her position as her 
well-deserved punishment for the primal sin under whose unfortunate conse- 
quences the race yet labors. Ethics have entered the scene, replacing the sim- 
plicities of ritual, taboo, and mana. The more sophisticated vehicle of myth 
also provides official explanations of sexual history. In Hesiod's tale, Zeus, a 
rancorous and arbitrary father figure, in sending Epimetheus evil in the 
form of female genitalia, is actually chastising him for adult heterosexual 
knowledge and activity. In opening the vessel she brings Cthe vulva or hymen, 
Pandora's "box") the male satisfies his curiosity but sustains the discovery 
only by punishing himself at the hands of the father god with death and the 
assorted calamities of postlapsarian life. The patriarchal trait of male rivalry 
across age or status line, particularly those of powerful father and rival son, 
is present as well as the ubiquitous maligning of the female. 

The myth of the Fall is a highly finished version of the same themes. As 
the central myth of the Judeo-Christian imagination and therefore of our im- 
mediate cultural heritage, it is well that we appraise and acknowledge the 
enormous power it still holds over us even in a rationalist era which has long 
ago given up literal belief in it while maintaining its emotional assent in- 
tact. 67 This mythic version of the female as the cause of human suffering, 
knowledge, and sin is still the foundation of sexual attitudes, for it represents 
the most crucial argument of the patriarchal tradition in the West. 

The Israelites lived in a continual state of war with the fertility cults of 
their neighbors; these latter afforded sufficient attraction to be the source of 
constant defection, and the figure of Eve, like that of Pandora, has vestigial 
traces of a fertility goddess overthrown. There is some, probably unconscious, 
evidence of this in the Biblical account which announces, even before the 
narration of the fall has begun— "Adam called his wife's name Eve; because 
she was the mother of all living things." Due to the fact that the tale represents 
a compilation of different oral traditions, it provides two contradictory 
schemes for Eve's creation, one in which both sexes are created at the same 
time, and one in which Eve is fashioned later than Adam, an afterthought 
bom from his rib, peremptory instance of the male's expropriation of the life 
force through a god who created the world without benefit of female as- 
sistance. 

67 It is impossible to assess how deeply embedded in our consciousness is tbe Eden 
legend and how utterly its patterns are planted in our habits of thought. One comes 
across its tone and design in the most unlikely places, such as Antonioni's Elm Blow-Up, 
to name but one of many striking examples. The action of the film takes place in an 
idyllic garden, loaded with primal overtones largely sexual, where, prompted by a 
tempter with a phallic gun, the female again betrays the male to death. The photog- 
rapher who witnesses the scene reacts as if he were being introduced both to the haggard 
knowledge of the primal scene and original sin at the same time. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



53 



The tale of Adam and Eve is, among many other things, a narrative of 
how humanity invented sexual intercourse. Many such narratives exist in 
preliterate myth and folk tale. Most of them strike us now as delightfully 
funny stories of primal innocents who require a good deal of helpful instruc- 
tion to figure it out. There are other major themes in the story: the loss of 
primeval simplicity, the arrival of death, and the first conscious experience 
of knowledge. All of them revolve about sex. Adam is forbidden to eat of the 
fruit of life or of the knowledge of good and evil, the warning states explic- 
idy what should happen if he tastes of the latter: "in that day that thou eatest 
thereof thou shalt surely die." He eats but fails to die (at least in the story), 
from which one might infer that the serpent told the truth. 

But at the moment when the pair eat of the forbidden tree they awake to 
their nakedness and feel shame. Sexuality is clearly involved, though the 
fable insists it is only tangential to a higher prohibition against disobeying 
orders in the matter of another and less controversial appetite— one for food. 
R6heim points out that the Hebrew verb for "eat" can also mean coitus. 
Everywhere in the Bible "knowing" is synonymous with sexuality, and clearly 
a product of contact with the phallus, here in the fable objectified as a snake. 
To blame the evils and sorrows of life— loss of Eden and the rest— on sexuality, 
would all too logically implicate the male, and such implication is hardly the 
purpose of the story, designed as it is expressly in order to blame all this 
world's discomfort on the female. Therefore it is the female who is tempted 
first and "beguiled" by the penis, transformed into something else, a snake. 
Thus Adam has "beaten the rap" of sexual guilt, which appears to be why the 
sexual motive is so repressed in the Biblical account. Yet the very transpar- 
ency of the serpent's universal phallic value shows how uneasy the mythic 
mind can be about its shifts. Accordingly, in her inferiority and vulnerability 
the woman takes and eats, simple carnal thing that she is, affected by flattery 
even in a reptile. Only after this does the male fall, and with him, humanity 
—for the fable has made him the racial type, whereas Eve is a mere sexual 
type and, according to tradition, either expendable or replaceable. And as 
the myth records the original sexual adventure, Adam was seduced by woman, 
who was seduced by a penis. "The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, 
she gave me of the fruit and I did eat" is the first man's defense. Seduced 
by the phallic snake, Eve is convicted for Adam's participation in sex. 

Adam's curse is to toil in the "sweat of his brow," namely the labor the 
male associates with civilization. Eden was a fantasy world without either 
effort or activity, which the entrance of the female, and with her sexuality, 
has destroyed. Eve's sentence is far more political in nature and a brilliant 
"explanation" of her inferior status. "In sorrow thou shalt bring forth chil- 
dren. And thy desire shall be to thy husband. And he shall rule over thee." 
Again, as in the Pandora myth, a proprietary father figure is punishing his 
subjects for adult heterosexuality. It is easy to agree with R6heim's comment 
on the negative attitude the myth adopts toward sexuality: "Sexual maturity 




54 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



is regarded as a misfortune, something that has robbed mankind of happi- 
the explanation of how death came into the world." 68 



ness 



What requires further emphasis is the responsibility of the female, a mar- 
ginal creature, in bringing on this plague, and the justice of her suborned 
condition as dependent on her primary role in this original sin. The connec- 
tion of woman, sex, and sin constitutes the fundamental pattern of western 
patriarchal thought thereafter. 

VIII Psychological 

The aspects of patriarchy already described have each an effect upon the 
psychology of both sexes. Their principal result is the interiorization of patri- 
archal ideology. Status, temperament, and role are all value systems with 
endless psychological ramifications for each sex. Patriarchal marriage and the 
family with its ranks and division of labor play a large part in enforcing 
them. The male's superior economic position, the female's inferior one have 
also grave implications. The large quantity of guilt attached to sexuality in 
patriarchy is overwhelmingly placed upon the female, who is, culturally 
speaking, held to be the culpable or the more culpable party in nearly any 
sexual liaison, whatever the extenuating circumstances. A tendency toward 
the reification of the female makes her more often a sexual object than a 
person. This is particularly so when she is denied human rights through 
chattel status. Even where this has been partly amended the cumulative effect 
of religion and custom is still very powerful and has enormous psychological 
consequences. Woman is still denied sexual freedom and the biological con- 
trol over her body through the cult of virginity, the double standard, the 
proscription against abortion, and in many places because contraception is 
physically or psychically unavailable to her. 

The continual surveillance in which she is held tends to perpetuate the 
infantilization of women even in situations such as those of higher educa- 
tion. The female is continually obliged to seek survival or advancement 
through the approval of males as those who hold power. She may do this 
either through appeasement or through the exchange of her sexuality for 
support and status. As the history of patriarchal culture and the representa- 
tions of herself within all levels of its cultural media, past and present, have 
a devastating effect upon her self image, she is customarily deprived of any 
but the most trivial sources of dignity or self-respect, In many patriarchies, lan- 
guage, as well as cultural tradition, reserve the human condition for the 
male. With the Indo-European languages this is a nearly inescapable habit 
of mind, for despite all the customary pretense that "man" and "humanity" 
are terms which apply equally to both sexes, the fact is hardly obscured 

e 8G&a R6heim, "Eden," Psychoanalytic Review, Vol. XXVII, New York, 1940. See 
also Theodor Reik, The Creation of Woman, and the account given in Hays, op. cit. 



1 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



55 



that in practice, general application favors the male far more often than the 
female as referent, or even sole referent, for such designations. 69 

When in any group of persons, the ego is subjected to such invidious ver- 
sions of itself through social beliefs, ideology, and tradition, the effect is 
bound to be pernicious. This coupled with the persistent though frequendy 
subtle denigration women encounter daily through personal contacts, the 
impressions gathered from the images and media about them, and the 
discrimination in matters of behavior, employment, and education which 
they endure, should make it no very special cause for surprise that women 
develop group characteristics common to those who suffer minority status 
and a marginal existence. A witty experiment by Philip Goldberg proves 
what everyone knows, that having internalized the disesteem in which they 
are held, women despise both themselves and each other. 70 This simple test 
consisted of asking women undergraduates to respond to the scholarship in 
an essay signed alternately by one John McKay and one Joan McKay. In 
making their assessments the students generally agreed that John was a re- 
markable thinker, Joan an unimpressive mind. Yet the articles were identical: 
the reaction was dependent on the sex of the supposed author. 

As women in patriarchy are for the most part marginal citizens when they 
are citizens at all, their situation is like that of other minorities, here defined 
not as dependent upon numerical size of the group, but on its status. "A 
minority group is any group of people who because of their physical or cul- 
tural characteristics, are singled out from others in the society in which they 
live for differential and unequal treatment." 71 Only a handful of sociologists 
have ever addressed themselves in any meaningful way to the minority status 
of women. 72 And psychology has yet to produce relevant studies on the 

69 Languages outside the Indo-European group are instructive. Japanese, for example, 
has one word for man Co(ofeo), another for woman (Jonna) and a third for human being 
(ningen). It would he as unthinkable to use the first to cover the third as it would be to 
use the second. 

70 Philip Goldberg, "Are Women Prejudiced Against Women?" Transaction, April 
1068. 

71 Louis Wirth, "Problems of Minority Groups," in The Science of Man in the World 
Crisis, ed. by Ralph Linton (New York, Appleton, 1945), p. 347. Wirth also stipulates 
that the group see itself as discriminated against. It is interesting that many women do 
not recognize themselves as discriminated against; no better proof could be found of die 
totality of their conditioning. 

7 - The productive handful in question include the following: 

Helen Mayer Hacker, "Women as a Minority Group," Social Forces, Vol. XXX, 

October 195 1. 

Gunnar Myrdal, An American Dilemma, Appendix 5 is a parallel of black minority 

status with women's minority status. 

Everett C. Hughes, "Social Change and Status Protest: An Essay on the Marginal 

Man," Phylon, Vol. X, First Quarter, 1949. 

Joseph K. Folsom, The Family and Democratic Society, 1943. 

Godwin Watson, "Psychological Aspects of Sex Roles," Socio! Psychology, Issues and 

Insights (Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1966), 




I! h 
i i 1 



il II. 



56 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



subject of ego damage to the female which might bear comparison to the 
excellent work done on the effects of racism on the minds of blacks and 
colonials. The remarkably small amount of modern research devoted to the 
psychological and social effects of masculine supremacy on the female and 
on the culture in general attests to the widespread ignorance or unconcern 
of a conservative social science which takes patriarchy to be both the status 
quo and the state of nature. 

What litde literature the social sciences afford us in this context confirms 
the presence in women of the expected traits of minority status: group self- 
hatred and self-rejection, a contempt both for herself and for her fellows— 
the result of that continual, however subde, reiteration of her inferiority 
which she eventually accepts as a fact, 73 Another index of minority status 
is the fierceness with which all minority group members are judged. The 
double standard is applied not only in cases of sexual conduct but other 
contexts as well. In the relatively rare instances of female crime too: in many 
American states a woman convicted of crime is awarded a longer sen- 
tence. 74 Generally an accused woman acquires a notoriety out of proportion 
to her acts and due to sensational publicity she may be tried largely for her 
"sex life." But so effective is her conditioning toward passivity in patriarchy, 
woman is rarely extrovert enough in her maladjustment to enter upon crim- 
inality. Just as every minority member must either apologize for the excesses 
of a fellow or condemn him with a strident enthusiasm, women are charac- 
teristically harsh, ruthless and frightened in their censure of aberration 
among their numbers. 

The gnawing suspicion which plagues any minority member, that the 
myths propagated about his inferiority might after all be true often reaches 
remarkable proportions in the personal insecurities of women. Some find 
their subordinate position so hard to bear that they repress and deny its 
existence. But a large number will recognize and admit their circumstances 
when they are properly phrased. Of two studies which asked women if they 
would have preferred to be bom male, one found that one fourth of the 
sample admitted as much, and in another sample, one half. 76 When one 
inquires of children, who have not yet developed as serviceable techniques 
of evasion, what their choice might be, if they had one, the answers of female 
children in a large majority of cases clearly favor birth into the elite group, 

73 My remarks on the minority status of women are summarized from all the articles 
listed, and I am particularly indebted to an accomplished critique of them in an unpub- 
lished draEt by Professor Marlene Dixon, formerly of the University of Chicago's Depart- 
ment of Sociology and the Committee on Human Development, presently of McGiU 
University. 

74 See The Commonwealth v. Daniels, 37 L.W. 2064, Pennsylvania Supreme Court, 
7/1/68 ([reversing 36 L.W. 2004). 

76 See Helen Hacker, op. tit., and Carolyn Bird, op. cit. 



THEORY OF SEXUAL POLITICS 



57 



whereas boys overwhelmingly reject the option of being girls. 78 The phe- 
nomenon of parents' prenatal preference for male issue is too common to re- 
quire much elaboration. In the light of the imminent possibility of parents 
actually choosing the sex of their child, such a tendency is becoming the 
cause of some concern in scientific circles. 77 

Comparisons such as Myrdal, Hacker, and Dixon draw between the 
ascribed attributes of blacks and women reveal that common opinion as- 
sociates the same traits with both: inferior intelligence, an instinctual or sen- 
sual gratification, an emotional nature both primitive and childlike, an 
imagined prowess in or affinity for sexuality, a contentment with their own 
lot which is in accord with a proof of its appropriateness, a wily habit of de- 
ceit, and concealment of feeling. Both groups are forced to the same ac- 
commodational tactics: an ingratiating or supplicatory manner invented to 
please, a tendency to study those points at which the dominant group are 
subject to influence or corruption, and an assumed air of helplessness in- 
volving fraudulent appeals for direction through a show of ignorance. 78 It 
is ironic how misogynist literature has for centuries concentrated on just 
these traits, directing its fiercest enmity at feminine guile and corruption, 
and particularly that element of it which is sexual, or, as such sources would 
have it, "wanton." 

As with other marginal groups a certain handful of women are accorded 
higher status that they may perform a species of cultural policing over the 
rest. Hughes speaks of marginality as a case of status dilemma experienced 
by women, blacks, or second-generation Americans who have "come up" in 
the world but are often refused the rewards of their efforts on the grounds 
of their origins. 79 This is particularly the case with "new" or educated 
women. Such exceptions are generally obliged to make ritual, and often comic, 
statements of deference to justify their elevation. These characteristically 
take the form of pledges of "femininity," namely a delight in docility and a 
large appetite for masculine dominance. Politically, the most useful persons 
for such a role are entertainers and public sex objects. It is a common trait of 
minority status that a small percentage of the fortunate are permitted to 
entertain their rulers. (That they may entertain their fellow subjects in the 
process is less to the point.) Women entertain, please, gratify, satisfy and 
flatter men with their sexuality. In most minority groups athletes or intel- 
lectuals are allowed to emerge as "stars," identification with whom should 
content their less fortunate fellows. In the case of women both such even- 
tualities are discouraged on the reasonable grounds that the most popular 

TS "One study of fourth graders showed ten times as many girls wishing they could 
have been boys, as boys who would have chosen to be girls," Watson, op. cit., p. 477. 

"Amitai Etiioni, "Sex Control, Science, and Society," Science, September 1968, 
pp. 1107-12. 

78 Myrdal, op. cit., Hacker, op. cit., Dixon, op. cit. 

78 Hughes, of. cit. 



¦ ¦ 



5 8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




explanations of the female's inferior status ascribe it to her physical weakness 
or intellectual inferiority. Logically, exhibitions of physical courage or agil- 
ity are indecorous, just as any display of serious intelligence tends to be out 
of place. 

Perhaps patriarchy's greatest psychological weapon is simply its uni- 
versality and longevity. A referent scarcely exists with which it might he 
contrasted or by which it might be confuted. While the same might be said 
of class, patriarchy has a still more tenacious or powerful hold through its 
successful habit of passing itself off as nature. Religion is also universal in 
human society and slavery was once nearly so; advocates of each were fond 
of arguing in terms of fatality, or irrevocable human "instinct"— even "bio- 
logical origins." When a system of power is thoroughly in command, it has 
scarcely need to speak itself aloud; when its workings are exposed and ques- 
tioned, it becomes not only subject to discussion, but even to change. Such a 
period is the one next under discussion. 



II 



HISTORICAL 
"BACKGROUND 




THREE 



The Sexual c R^volution 

FIRST PHASE 
1830-1930 



POLITICAL 



Definition 

The term "sexual revolution" has such vogue at present it may be invoked 
to explain even the most trivial of socio-sexual fashions. Such usage is at best 
naive. In the context of sexual politics, truly revolutionary change must have 
bearing on that political relationship between the sexes we have outlined 
under "theory." Since the state of affairs defined there as patriarchy had ob- 
tained for so long and with such universal success, there seemed little reason 
to imagine it might alter. Yet it did. Or at least it began to— and for nearly a 
century it must have looked as though the organization of human society 
were about to undergo a revision possibly more drastic than any it had ever 
known within the historical period. During this time it must have often ap- 
peared as if the most fundamental government of civilization, patriarchy it- 
self, was so disputed and besieged that it stood at the verge of collapse. Of 
course, nothing of the sort occurred: the first phase ended in reform and 
was succeeded by reaction. Nonetheless, very substantial change did emerge 
from its revolutionary ferment. 

Just because the period in question did not in fact complete the drastic 
transformation it seemed to promise, it might be well to speculate for a mo- 



*¦ 




6a 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



ment upon what a fully realized sexual revolution might be like. A hypothet- 
ical definition may be of service in measuring the shortcomings of the first 
phase. It might also be of use in the future since there is reason to sup- 
pose that the reaction which set in after the first decades of the twentieth 
century is about to give way before another upsurge of revolutionary spirit. 

A sexual revolution would require, perhaps first of all, an end of tradi- 
tional sexual inhibitions and taboos, particularly those that most threaten pa- 
triarchal monogamous marriage: homosexuality, "illegitimacy," adolescent, 
pre- and extra-marital sexuality. The negative aura with which sexual activ- 
ity has generally been surrounded would necessarily be eliminated, together 
with the double standard and prostitution, The goal of revolution would be 
a permissive single standard of sexual freedom, and one uncorrupted by the 
crass and exploitative economic bases of traditional sexual alliances. 

Primarily, however, a sexual revolution would bring the institution of 
patriarchy to an end, abolishing both the ideology of male supremacy and 
the traditional socialization by which it is upheld in matters of status, role, 
and temperament. This would produce an integration of the separate sexual 
subcultures, an assimilation by both sides of previously segregated human 
experience. A related event here would be the re-examination of the traits 
categorized as "masculine" and "feminine," with a reassessment of their hu- 
man desirability: the violence encouraged as virile, the excessive passivity 
defined as "feminine" proving useless in either sex; the efficiency and in- 
tellectuality of the "masculine" temperament, the tenderness and considera- 
tion associated with the "feminine" recommending themselves as appropriate 
to both sexes. 

It seems unlikely all this could take place without drastic effect upon 
the patriarchal proprietary family. The abolition of sex role and the com- 
plete economic independence of women would undermine both its authority 
and its financial structure. An important corollary would he the end of the 
present chattel status and denial of rights to minors. The collective profes- 
sionalization (and consequent improvement) of the care of the young, also 
involved, would further undermine family structure while contributing to 
the freedom of women. Marriage might generally be replaced by voluntary 
association, if such is desired. Were a sexual revolution completed, the prob- 
lem of overpopulation might, because vitally linked to the emancipation of 
women, cease to be the insoluble dilemma it now appears. 

Such conjecture leads us a long way from the period under discussion. 
What are its claims to have made a beginning at sexual revolution? One 
might object, that since the Victorian period was so notoriously inhibited, the 
era between 1830 and 1930 could accomplish nothing at all in the area of 
sexual freedom. Yet it is important to recall that as sexual suppression in the 
form of "prudery" reached a crisis in this period, only one course out of it 
was possible— relief. The last three decades of the nineteenth as well as the 
first three decades of the twentieth century were a time of greatly increasing 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



63 



sexual freedom for both sexes. This in particular meant the attainment of a 
measure of sexual freedom for women, the group who in general had never 
been allowed much, if any, such freedom without a devastating loss of social 
standing, or the dangers of pregnancy in a society with strong sanctions 
against illegitimate birth. The first phase achieved a good measure of sexual 
freedom and/or equity by struggling toward a single standard of morality. 
The Victorians worked rather illogically at this in two ways. While they 
strove to remove the onus from the "fallen woman," they tried with a fre- 
quendy naive optimism to raise boys to be as "pure" as girls. However humor- 
ous a spectacle they present in these efforts, theirs was the first period in 
history that faced and tried to solve the issue of the double standard and the 
inhumanities of prostitution. A superficial knowledge of the reactionary era 
which succeeded the first phase might lead one to imagine it to be the more 
significant era of sexual freedom. Such is not in fact the case, for the liberali- 
zation of this period is haTdly more than a continuation or diffusion of that 
begun before it. Often subverted for patriarchal ends it acquired a new 
exploitative character of its own. Any increase in sexual freedom for women 
in the period 1930-60 (for at its close the first phase had given them a rich 
increase) is probably due less to social change than to better technology in 
the manufacture of contraceptive devices and their proliferation. Wide dis- 
tribution of what is as yet the most useful of these, "the pill," falls outside 
the counterrevolutionary period. Save for this handy specific, the "New 
Woman" of the twenties was as well off, and possibly better provided with 
sexual freedom, than the woman of the fifties. 

During the first phase, the most important problem was to challenge the 
patriarchal structure and to furnish an initial impetus for the enormous trans- 
formations a sexual revolution might effect in the areas of temperament, role, 
and status. It must be clearly understood that the arena of sexual revolution 
is within human consciousness even more pre-eminendy than it is within 
human institutions. So deeply embedded is patriarchy that the character 
structure it creates in both sexes is perhaps even more a habit of mind and a 
way of life than a political system. Because the first phase challenged both 
habit of mind and political structures— but had much greater success with 
the latter than with the former— it was unable to withstand the onset of re- 
action and failed to fulfill its revolutionary promise. Yet as its goal was a far 
more radical alteration in the quality of life than that of most political revolu- 
tions, it is easy to comprehend how this type of revolution, basic and cultural 
as it is, has proceeded fitfully and slowly, more on the pattern of the gradual 
but fundamental metamorphosis which the industrial revolution or the rise 
of the middle class accomplished, than on the model of spasmodic rebellion 
(followed by even greater reaction) one observes in the French Revolution. 
Moreover, as the result of the rapid onset of a period of reaction, the first 
phase of the sexual revolution, like a moving object arrested mid-course, could 
not proceed even to the expenditure of its initial momentum. When we recall 



6 4 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



that this force has been revitalized only as recently as the last five years, and 
after some four decades of dormancy, we realize how amorphous and con- 
temporary is the phenomenon we seek to describe— how recalcitrant before 
the precision historians seek to impose on more distant and defined events. 

It cannot be emphasized too strongly that many, indeed most, of those first 
affected by the sexual revolution had neither a systematic understanding of 
it, nor foresight into its possible implications. Few, even of those who be- 
lieved they were sympathetic, would have been committed to all its possible 
consequences. This is even true, to a varying degree, of its theorists: Mill 
never guessed at the effects it might have upon the family, and Engels seems 
quite unaware of its enormous psychological ramifications. 

Changes as drastic and fundamental as those of a sexual revolution are 
not easily arrived at. Nor should it be surprising that such change might 
take place by stages that are capable of interruption and temporary regres- 
sion. In view of this fact, the shortcomings of the first phase are under- 
standable, and even the arrest and subversion of its progress which one en- 
counters in the next era, while irritating and deplorable, is, to a degree, 
explicable as a comprehensible pause or plateau within an ongoing process. 
Although the first phase fell woefully short of accomplishing the aims of its 
theorists and its most far-seeing exponents, it did nevertheless make some 
monumental progress and furnish a groundwork on which the present and 
the future can build. Although failing to penetrate deeply enough into the 
substructure of patriarchal ideology and socialization, it did attack the most 
obvious abuses in its political, economic, and legal superstructure, accom- 
plishing very notable reform in the area of legislative and other civil rights, 
suffrage, education, and employment. For a group excluded— as women were 
—from minimal civil liberties throughout the historical period, their very at- 
tainment was a great deal to achieve in one century. 

By an oversight too conspicuous to be accidental, historians have ignored 
the issue of sexual revolution, dismissed it with frivolous footnotes intended 
to demonstrate the folly of "votes for women," or mistaken it for a trivial 
exhibitionist ripple in sexual fashion. Yet the great cultural change which 
the beginnings of a sexual revolution represent is at least as dramatic as the 
four or five other social upheavals in the modern period to which histori- 
ographical attention is zealously devoted. 

Since the Enlightenment, the West has undergone a number of cataclysmic 
changes: industrial, economic, and political revolution. But each appeared 
to operate, to a large extent, without much visible or direct reference to one 
half of humanity. It is rather disturbing how the great changes brought about 
by the extension of the franchise and by the development of democracy 
which the eighteenth and nineteenth century accomplished, the redistribu- 
tion of wealth which was the aim of socialism (and which has even had its 
effect upon the capitalist countries) and finally, the vast changes wrought 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



6? 



by the industrial revolution and the emergence of technology— all, had and 
to some degree still have, but a tangential and contingent effect upon the 
lives of that majority of the population who might be female. Knowledge of 
this is bound to draw our attention to the fact that the primary social and 
political distinctions are not even those based on wealth or rank but those 
based on sex. For the most pertinent and fundamental consideration one 
can bestow upon our culture is to recognize its basis in patriarchy. 

And it was against patriarchy that the sexual revolution was directed. 
Difficult as it is to explain such a radical shift in collective consciousness, 
it is almost as difficult to date it precisely. One might look back as far as 
the Renaissance and consider the effect of the liberal education it devised 
when such learning was finally permitted to women. Or one might reflect 
on the influence of the Enlightenment: the subversive impact of its agnostic 
rationalism upon patriarchal religion, the tendency of its humanism to ex- 
tend dignity to a number of deprived groups, and the invigorating clarity 
which the science it sponsored exercised upon traditional notions both of the 
female and of nature. One might also speculate upon the marginal impetus 
provided by the French Revolution in breaking down other ancient hier- 
archies of power. Two beliefs which French radicalism had bequeathed to 
the American Revolution must also have had an effect: the idea that govern- 
ment relies for its legitimacy on the consent of the governed, and the faith in 
the existence in inalienable human rights. Out of this intellectual milieu 
came Mary Wollstonecraft's Vindication, the first document asserting the 
full humanity of women and insisting upon its recognition. A friend of Paine 
and of French revolutionaries, its author was sufficiently in touch with revolu- 
tionary thought to urge the application of its basic premises to that majority 
still excluded from the Rights of Man. 

Although it is beyond question that the culture of the eighteenth century 
in France had much to do with the suggestion that democracy apply in sexual 
as well as class politics, the purview of the present essay, coming as it does 
from America, must be confined to the English-speaking cultures, and as 
even the reforming influence of the French Revolution was throttled in Eng- 
land until the danger of revolution had passed, and consequently did not 
emerge in any fullness until the 1830s, it seems appropriate to begin this 
chapter's discussion in the nineteenth century. The date set for its beginnings 
can be justified to some extent on the grounds that these years saw the emer- 
gence of actual political organization on the issues of sexual politics, excited 
public controversy on the implications of a sexual revolution, and in litera- 
ture, an obsessive concern with the emotions and experiences of such a revolu- 
tion. Finally, the period recommends itself for the pioneering, significant 
reforms in sexual politics which were actually accomplished within it. If the 
sexual revolution was born in the thirties and forties of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, it enjoyed, nevertheless, a very generous period of gestation in the womb 
of time; possibly it was conceived in the eighteenth century, perhaps a glint 



¦ It! 



66 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



of the desire which begat it may even be observed in the splendid eye of 
Renaissance. But the decade of the 1830s demands our attention on specific 
grounds, the coming of age of the reform movement in England, and the 
first female anti-slavery convention in America in 1837. 1 Both events had 
profound implications. The British reform movement opened the way to an 
extension of suffrage to many groups previously excluded. It also inaugurated 
a series of investigations into the conditions working women endured, fol- 
lowed by measures improving those conditions. In America, the abolition 
movement offered the first occasion upon which women were able to organize 
in a political manner. With the 1840s and particularly with 1848, one is on 
very sure ground indeed, for in that year the meeting in Seneca Falls, New 
York, marked the beginning of the political organization of women in their 
own behalf. British women began agitation under Mill's leadership in the 
sixties, but it was in America and at Seneca Falls that the first challenge was 
issued in a seventy-year struggle which became the international Woman's 
Movement. 

Paradoxes 

Before embarking on a study of any historical period it is instructive to 
contrast its own divers impressions of itself against each other. When one 
examines the various types of evidence available from the period 1830-1930, 
one is struck by a disparity and contradiction between fact and faith nearly 
breathtaking. It is perhaps most revealing to compare the two prevailing 
official versions of the culture's sexual politics: polite and legal. The con- 
ventional chivalrous attitude (and the nineteenth century carried this affec- 
tation very far indeed) asserted authoritatively that woman was superbly 
well cared for by her "natural protector." Yet the legal system, what must 
here be called the fact rather than the pious hope of the matter, furnished 
information far less optimistic. The reformation of the abject legal status of 
women is one of the major achievements of the Woman's Movement and 
feminist agitation during the first phase of the sexual revolution. Patriarchal 
law did not surrender readily or gracefully. In the United States it was 
amended piecemeal, slowly and laboriously, state by state all through the 
fifties, sixties, seventies, and eighties. In England the case was much the 
same; the Married Woman's Property Act, touching upon a whole series of 
civil rights, was first introduced in 1856, enacted in 1870, amended in 1874, 
and consolidated in the Act of 1882, then added to and enlarged upon on 

1 The Reform Act of 1 832, landmark that it is, did not reform very much. In fact it 
was the first English legislation specifically (_de jure rather than de facto') to exclude 
women from legal privileges such as the franchise. But it did open the way to a whole 
spate of highly important legislative changes in the decades which followed. In America 
the year 1837 saw another auspicious event; Mount Holyoke was opened, the first college 
for women in either country. 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



67 



various occasions up to 1908. In both countries even an approach to a sensi- 
ble divorce law was not made until very late. 2 

Under the common law which prevailed in both countries at the opening 
of the period, a woman underwent "civil death" upon marriage, forfeiting 
what amounted to every human right, as felons now do upon entering prison. 
She lacked control over her earnings, was not permitted to choose her domi- 
cile, could not manage property legally her own, 3 sign papers, or bear wit- 
ness. Her husband owned both her person and her services, could— and did — 
rent her out in any form he pleased and pocket the profits. He was permitted 
to sue others for wages due her and confiscate them. All that the wife ac- 
quired by her labor, service, or act during "coverture" became the legal prop- 
erty of the male. Save for owning property, single women enjoyed nearly as 
few civil rights under law as did married women. The principle of "cover- 
ture" or femme amverte, general throughout Western jurisprudence, placed 
the married woman in the position both of minor and chattel throughout 
her life. Her husband became something like a legal keeper, as by marrying 
she succumbed to a mortifying process which placed her in the same class 
with lunatics or idiots, who were also "dead in the law." 

No matter how irresponsible an individual a husband might be, nor how 
careless of the welfare of his children, he was legally entitled to demand and 
receive the wife's wages at any moment, even to the peril of his depend- 
ents' lives. As head of the proprietary family, the husband was the sole 
"owner" of wife and children, empowered to deprive the mother of her off- 
spring, who were his legal possessions, should it please him to do so upon di- 
vorcing or deserting her. A father, like a slaver, could order the law to reclaim 
his chattel-property relatives when he liked. Wives might be detained against 
their will; English wives who refused to return to their homes were subject 
to imprisonment. 

Should the husband die intestate, the state might pick over his property 
(for all property was legally his) leaving the widow nothing at all, or as 
little as it chose to bestow upon her. New York law was edifying and punc- 

2 The first divorce law in England to make any reform was passed in 1858. But it was 
based on double-standard premises and its provisions ensured that divorce remain very 
difficult and expensive to obtain. Further reform did not come until after the first world 
war. In America some states initiated progressive change in the later nineteenth century, 
others not until the twentieth century. 

8 The husband had complete rights over a wife's personal estate and income. Over real 
estate he also possessed a large number of rights, although wealthy and landed families 
had worked out elaborate dodges here in the form of "settlements," arranged according 
to rules of equity, as common law did not recognize ownership in women. But setdement 
was available only to the comfortable classes (English law stipulated it applied only to 
property over £200). It was permitted in the interests of class rather than of women, 
who, whatever their setdement, were prevented from the free use of what might legally 
be theirs. 




ill 



68 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



tilious here; regardless of the number of her children, it enumerated the fol- 
lowing as her due: 

The family Bible, pictures, school books, and all books not exceeding the sum 
of $50; spinning wheels, weaving looms, and stoves; ten sheep and their fleeces, 
two swine and their pork . . . All necessary wearing apparel, beds, bedsteads, 
and bedding; the clothing of the widow and ornaments proper to her station- 
one table, six chairs, six knives and forks, six tea-cups and saucers, one sugar 
dish, one milk pot, one tea-pot, and six spoons. 4 

The closest analogue to marriage was feudalism. Lest a woman entertain 
any doubts over her serf status, the wedding ceremony, with its injunc- 
tions to subordinance and obedience, was perfectly clear upon this point. 
St. Paul abjured the bride to be obedient unto her husband as unto the 
Lord, a behest more powerful to the pious (and care was taken that women 
receive large doses of piety) than any mere secular command. Secular law 
was equally explicit and ruled that when man and woman became "one," 
that one was the man. It would be difficult to find a more perfect definition 
of subservience than the one Blackstone's Commentary gives in explaining 
the wife's position in common law: 

By marriage, the husband and wife are one person in law: that is, the very 
being or legal existence of the woman is suspended during marriage, 01 at least 
is incorporated and consolidated into that of the husband . . . But though our 
law in general considers man and wife as one person, yet there are some instances 
in which she is separately considered; as inferior to him, and acting by his com- 
pulsion. 5 

When Henry Blackwell married Lucy Stone in 1855, this liberal gentle- 
man and feminist renounced a formidable set of legal prerogatives which 
came to him with the contract. The text of this abdication has a certain 
period charm: 

While we acknowledge our mutual affection by publicly assuming the relation- 
ship of husband and wife ... we deem it a duty to declare that this act on our 
part implies no sanction of, nor promise of voluntary obedience to such of the 

4 Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Mathilda Gage, The History of 
Woman Suffrage (Rochester, New York, 1881), Vol. I, pp. 175-76. This quotation, like 
a number of others from HWS and the congressional debates, is quoted by Flexner, ojj. 
cit., p. 63. 

B Blackstone's Commentaries, Vol. I, "Rights of Persons," 3d Edition, 1768, Chapter 
14, p. 44a. "And therefore all deeds executed, and acts done by her during coverture 
are void"— it is ironic Low after this flat statement of legal nonentity Blackstone can say 
this is "for the most part, intended for her benefit," and forgetting his dullness in 
blandishment proclaim "so great a favorite is the female sex of the laws of England." The 
last two phrases are from Blackstone's Laws of England (1765) Bk. I, Ch. 15, p. 433. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



69 



present laws of marriage as refuse to recognize the wife as an independent, ra- 
tional being, while they confer upon the husband an injurious and unnatural 
superiority . , . We protest especially against the laws which give the husband: 

1. The custody of the wife's person. 

2. The exclusive control and guardianship of their children. 

3. The sole ownership of her personal and the use of her real estate, unless 
previously settled upon her, or placed in the hands of trustees, as in the case 
of minors, lunatics and idiots. 

4. The absolute right to the product of her industry. 

5. Also against any laws which give to the widower so much larger and more 
permanent an interest in the property of his deceased wife than they give 
to the widow in that of the deceased husband. 

6. Finally, against the whole system by which "the legal existence of the wife 
is suspended during marriage" so that, in most States, she neither has a legal 
part in the choice of her residence, nor can she make a will, nor sue or be 
sued in her own name, nor inherit property. 8 

It is an interesting exercise to contrast the customary attitudes and protes- 
tations of what society judged were its most "responsible" males with certain 
prosaic examples of their effects in actual life. The muddle of unction and 
apprehension which passed for chivalry is clear in this legislator's oratory: 

Sir, it has been said that "the hand that rocked the cradle ruled the world," 
and there is truth as well as beauty in that expression. Women in this country 
by their elevated social position, can exercise more influence upon public af- 
fairs, than they could coerce by the use of the ballot. When God married our 
first parents in the garden according to that ordinance they were made "bone 
of one bone and flesh of one flesh;" and the whole theory of government and 
society proceeds upon the assumption that their interests are one, that their re- 
lations are so intimate and tender that whatever is for the benefit of the one is for 
the benefit of the other . . . The woman who undertakes to put her sex in the 
adversary position to man, who undertakes by the use of some independent 
political power to contend and fight against man, displays a spirit which would, 
if able, convert all the now harmonious elements of society into a state of war, 
and make every home a hell on earth. 7 

In answering the objection of a New York senator that in attaining human 
and civil rights women might lose their "femininity," the labor organizer 
Rose Schneiderman describes a different reality altogether: 

We have women working in the foundries, stripped to the waist, if you please, 
because of the heat. Yet the Senator says nothing about these women losing 

6 Anthony, Stanton, and Gage, H1VS, Vol. I, pp. 2,60-61. Quoted in Flexner, op. 
cit., p. 64. 

T The speaker is Senator Williams of Oregon. From the Congressional Globe, 39th 
Congress (1867), and Session, Part I, p. 56. Quoted in Flexner, op. cit., p, 148. 



7° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




their charm ... Of course you know the reason they are employed in foundries 
is that they are cheaper and work longer hours than men. Women in the laun- 
dries, for instance, stand for thirteen or fourteen hours in the terrible steam 
and heat with their hands in hot starch. Surely these women won't lose any 
more of their beauty and charm by putting a ballot in a ballot box once a year 
than they are likely to lose standing in foundries or laundries all year round. 
There is no harder contest than the contest for bread, let me tell you that. 8 

Wanda Neff's scholarly and informative study of Victorian working 
women has documented the effects of benign masculine protection in Eng- 
land. As in America women generally suffered from longer hours, duller 
tasks, more noxious working conditions, and lower wages than men in every 
trade. Parliamentary Blue Books, Kay-Shuttleworth's reports, and Engels' 
Conditions of the Working Class in England all present appalling descrip- 
tions of the outrages English women endured in the industrial revolution 
while the doctrine of manly guardianship was gravely proclaimed. Neff 
prints the personal testimony of a "drawer" in the coal mines of Little- 
Bolton-the reader's attention is directed toward the position this woman 
occupies in relation to her connubial master as well as to the abuses perpe- 
trated on her by her employers: 9 

I have a belt around my waist and a chain passing between my legs, and I go 
on my hands and feet. The road is very steep, and we have to hold by a rope, 
and when there is no rope, by anything we can catch hold of . . . The pit is 
very wet where I work, and the water comes over our clogs always, and I have 
seen it up to my thighs: it rains in at the roof terribly: my clothes are wet 
through almost all day long. I never was ill in my life but when I was lying-in. 
My cousin looks after my children in the daytime. I am very tired when I get 
home at night; I fall asleep sometimes before I get washed. I am not so strong 
as I was, and cannot stand my work so well as I used to do. I have drawn till 
I have had the skin off me; the belt and chain is worse when we are in the familv 
way. My feller [husband] has beaten me many a rime for not being ready. I 
were not used to it at Erst, and he had little patience. I have known many a man 
beat his drawer, 10 

8 From an address, "Senators versus Working Women," given at Cooper Union before 
the Wage Earners Suffrage League of New York, March 29, 191 2, p. 5. Quoted in Fiex- 
ner, of. cit., pp. 258-59. 

e Another English historian has this to say about the position of women in labor: 

Although eminent historians of the labor and trade union movements have preferred to 

scuttle hurriedly across this dangerous ground, the women's battle in the unions was with 

the men rather than with the employers-with the domestic not the economic boss." Roger 

Fulford, Votes for Women (London, Faber, 1557), p. 101. 

io Wanda Neff, Victorian Working Women (Columbia University Press, New York, 
1929). p. 72. The speaker was thirty-seven years old and named Betty Harris. Neff de- 
scribes the task of her occupation: "... drawers dragged the wagon behind them in 
places too low for horses to be used, or carried loads of coal on their backs from half a 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



7* 



Other contradictions intrude upon the student. The Victorians are re- 
nowned for their devotion to "purity," and "chastity." Yet in the 1860s Parli- 
ament passed a series of measures entitled The Contagious Diseases Acts by 
which the government legalized and regulated prostitution. 11 The age of 
consent was set at twelve years of age. The Acts provided that any woman 
might be taken for a prostitute on the word of the police or their agents and 
subject to involuntary medical examination, imprisonment should she refuse, 
and the indignity of being reduced to a species of slave or pariah in either 
case. 

All systems of oppression have invented, and granting poetic license, have 
even believed, whole libraries of legends as to the beneficent effect their des- 
potism produced upon their subjects, dimly perceived in the mellow light 
of cherished dependents whose role of servitude enriches the lives of their 
masters. Here is another statement of the cloistered circumstances of female 
service: 

It seems to me as if the God of our race has stamped upon [the woman] a milder 
gentler nature which not only makes them shrink from but disqualifies them 
from the turmoil and battle of public life. They have a higher and holier mis- 
sion. It is in retiracy [sic] to make the character of coming men. Their mission 
is at home, by their blandishments and their love to assuage the passions of men 
as they come in from the batde of life, and not themselves by joining in the 
contest to add fuel to the very flames ... It will be a sorry day for this coun- 
try when those vestal fires of love and piety are put out. 12 

The famous Triangle Fire is some evidence of how serious the discrepancy 
between illusion and reality could become. On March 25, 191 1, the premises 
of the Triangle Shirtwaist company burned. The company occupied a loft 
building where New York University now stands. The firm's 700 employees 
sat back to back, wedged tighdy into rows between their machines. As the 
fire spread rapidly to the ninth and tenth floors at the top of the factory, 
workers panicked. Elevators proved inadequate. Iron gates shut off the stair- 
cases. The exits leading to the fire escapes were in many cases shuttered and 
locked. The building had no outside fire escapes and only one inside with a 
twenty-five foot jump at the bottom. It soon broke with the weight of the 
hundreds swarming over it. The fire department's tallest ladders reached only 

hundred weight to a hundred weight and a half, for twelve, fourteen, sixteen hours daily, 
sometimes, in extreme cases, for thirty^six hours." Ihid. 

11 This is truly paradoxical; the contradiction is of course only apparent, not real, for 
as the historian Hale^vy observes, "European sex morality rests on the complementary 
pillars of marriage and prostitution." Elie Hahlvy, History of the English People in the 
Nineteenth Century, Vol. VI, The Rule of Democracy, 1905-14), p. 498. 

12 The speaker is Senator Frelinghuysen of New Jersey. From the Congressional Globe, 
39th Congress (1867), 2nd Session, Part I, p. 5. Quoted in Flexner, op. cit., pp. 
148-49. 



p 




72 SEXUAL POLITICS 

to the sixth floor. Nets were spread but the bodies hurtled down too fast and 
broke them. As the afternoon drew to a close, one hundred and forty-six op- 
eratives, all women, most of them young girls, were dead. Some had been 
burned to death, some died as their bodies hit the pavement, some were im- 
paled upon an iron fence. The two men who owned the vast sweatshop were 
tried and then acquitted. One partner was later fined $2o. 13 

In their fatuity, those who sounded the dominant note of chivalrous pre- 
tense acknowledged almost no restraints whatsoever in the degree of self- 
indulgence and regressive nostalgia they permitted themselves. Here is a typi- 
cal anti-suffragist passage dedicated to the favorite theme of motherhood: 

Whether the child's heart pulses beneath her own or throbs against her breast, 
motherhood demands above all tranquility, freedom from contest, from excite- 
ment, from the heart burnings of strife. The welfare, mental and physical, of 
the human race tests, to a more or less degree, upon that tranquility. 14 

To this stimulating stuff one might oppose the words of the great feminist 
and abolitionist, Sojourner Truth, a slave in New York until that state 
finally abolished slavery in 1827, whereupon she was licensed to graduate 
to domestic service. Speaking at a woman's rights convention in Akron, Ohio 
in 185 1, Sojourner Truth answered a cleric who had argued with courtly 
aplomb that as women were helpless physical weaklings, they were not en- 
titled to civil rights: 

That man over there says women need to be helped into carriages and lifted 
over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere. Nobody ever helps me into 
carriages or over puddles, or gives me the best place— and ain't I a woman? 

Look at this arm! I have ploughed and planted and gathered into bams, and 
no man could head me— and ain't I a woman? 

I could work as much and eat as much as a man— when I could get it— and 
bear the lash as well! And ain't 1 a woman? 

I have borne thirteen children, and seen most of 'em sold off to slavery, and 

13 This account is put together from information in Aileen Kradiror's The Ideas of tfce 
Woman Suffrage Movement (New York, Columbia University, 1965), p. 155, and 
Mildred Adams The Right to Be People (New York, Lippincott, 1966), pp. 123-24. 
Flexner (op. cit.) records the bizarre fact that at the trial it came out that the stairway 
exits were locked to prevent theft of merchandise or a sudden walk-out strike. Adams 
points out that the disaster led to a series of excellent factory laws strongly supported by 
the suffragist movement. Two years before the fire the great Triangle strike afforded one 
of the first proofs that women could organize in employment and was a triumph both 
for the Woman's Movement, which supported it handsomely, and the Union Movement. 

14 The speaker is Senator McCumber of North Dakota, arguing against female suffrage 
in one of the final Congressional debates. The Nineteenth Amendment was defeated by 
two votes the next day. From the Congressional Record, 65th Congress, 2nd Session, 
Vol. 56, Part II, p. 10774 (1919)- Quoted in Flexner, op. cit., p. 309. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



73 



when I cried out with my mother's grief, none but Jesus heard me. And ain't I 
a woman? 15 

It is necessary to realize that the most sacrosanct article of sexual politics 
jn the period, the Victorian doctrine of chivalrous protection and its fa- 
miliar protestations of respect, rests upon the tacit assumption, a cleverly expe- 
ditious hit of humbug, that all women were "ladies'-namely members of that 
fraction of the upper classes and bourgeoisie which treated women to ex- 
pressions of elaborate concern, while permitting them no legal or personal 
freedoms. The psycho-political tactic here is a pretense that the indolence 
and luxury of the upper-class woman's role in what Veblen called "vicar- 
ious consumption" 16 was the happy lot of all women. The efficacy of this 
maneuver depends on dividing women by class and persuading the privileged 
that they live in an indulgence they scarcely deserve. A use of intimidation 
in one class and envy in another effectively prevents solidarity. The young 
middle-class woman could be frightened into social and sexual conformity 
with the specters of governessing, factory work, or prostitution. And the less 
favored female is left only to dream of becoming a "lady," the single improve- 
ment to her situation she is permitted to conceive of, the hope of acquiring 
social and economic status through attracting the sexual patronization of the 
male. Despite the fact that class feeling prevented this from happening very 
often, it is a recurrent and favorite fantasy in the literature of the period. 
When the only known "freedom" is a gilded voluptuousness attainable 
through the largesse of someone who owns and controls everything, there 
is little incentive to struggle for personal fulfillment or liberation. 

To succeed, both the sexual revolution and the Woman's Movement which 
led it would have to unmask chivalry and expose its courtesies as subtle 
manipulation. It would also have to cross class lines and join lady to factory 
hand, the loose and the respectable, in a common cause. To the extent it 
could be so, it succeeded. 

The Woman's Movement 
Education 

As a number of competent historians have already documented this event 
it is my purpose here simply to recapitulate directing the reader's glance 
across its general surface so that I may comment upon its effects in a wider 
cultural context and particularly that of literature. 

Curiously enough, the dictionary supplies us with a definition of "fem- 

15 Anthony, Stanton, and Gage, History of Woman Suffrage, Vol. I, p. 116. The 
passage is printed in dialect in the original and set in Gage's descriptive prose. I have 
standardized the spelling and excerpted the words of the speaker. 

16 In The Theory of the Leisure Class Thorstein Veblen argues that the bourgeois 
class displays its wealth through its women whose idleness and expensive vanities are an 
exhibition of the industry and prestige of their proprietors, their husbands and fathers. 



.l"i| 



74 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



inism" which is, in fact, neither more nor less than a complete and satis- 
factory characterization of the ends of the sexual revolution itself: "... a 
system of political, economic, and social equality between the sexes." As this 
is so sweeping a formula, involving the radical transformation of an entire 
society with which this whole essay attempts to deal— a sexual revolution 
in fact— this section is confined to the Woman's Movement and the concrete 
reforms it effected in the specific areas of education, the political organization 
of women (particularly around the issue of suffrage), and employment. We 
must acknowledge however, that most other related changes effected within 
society during the first phase arose from or co-operated with the vanguard 
which the Woman's Movement represented. 

As with the liberation of any group long oppressed, the first priority 
was education. Since Plato's liberal suggestions in The Republic were never 
followed, it was the Renaissance which furnished the first applied theories 
of education for women. Alberti's Delia Famiglia is fairly representative 
of these. The purpose of such minimal training as it recommends is merely 
an aesthetic and convenient docility. It bears some resemblance to the plan 
of mental sedation which inspired the white founders of black colleges in the 
United States, intent primarily on the creation of less incompetent agricul- 
turalists and a more tractable servant class. With women too, the concession 
was gradually made that a barely literate service might have more to recom- 
mend it than the illiterate variety. Such inferior association as the products 
of the former might provide are still better company than utter ignorance,- 
while at the same time, they hold none of the terrors posed by equals. The 
education of women was not thought of as a course of study beyond the 
threshold level of learning, a genteel polish its major achievement. And in 
most cases it was deliberately cynical in its emphasis upon "virtue"— a sugared 
word which meant obedience, servility, and a sexual inhibition perilously 
near to frigidity. 

Coming from a man who contributed so much to the French Revolution, 
Rousseau's impressions of the proper education for women were as reaction- 
ary as they were influential: 

The whole education of women ought to be relative to men. To please them, 
to be useful to them, to make themselves loved and honored by them, to educate 
them when young, to care for them when grown, to counsel them, to make 
life sweet and agreeable to them— these are the duties of women at all times, 
and what should be taught them from their infancy. 17 

Most education for women in the nineteenth century followed this pre- 
scription scrupulously— a great deal of it does so to this day. There are an 
endless number of statements from the period advocating higher education 

17 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, L'fimile or A Treatise on Education, edited by W. H. Payne 
CNew York and London, 1906), p. 263. 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



75 



for women on the grounds that it would make them better housewives and 
mothers; there are an equal number which argue against the effort, predicting 
its malevolent influence should the newly educated go beyond the agreed- 
upon end of subordination. 18 

Even with such perfect co-operative subjection as an ideal, the project of 
educating depressed groups has always the seeds of its own subversion within 
it. A litde knowledge is indeed a dangerous thing if only because it so often 
induces a thirst for more. Serious study can grow even from the rudiments of 
prescribed frivolity; can give rise to analysis, direction, organization— finally 
the way out of present circumstances. And the nineteenth century saw this 
thirst grow to Gargantuan proportions, while it produced such phenomena 
as the crazy pathos of Mary Lyon's green bag and its travels over New Eng- 
land begging contributions of five, three, and one dollar— and even, in its 
graceful lack of discrimination, accepting an offering of six cents— that a real 
college might open for women in America. 19 

Mount Hoi yoke opened its doors in 1837. Obcrlin had admitted women to 
its degree the same year and was the first college to offer women an educa- 
tion unquestionably equal to that of men. Over the following decades a hand- 
ful of eastern colleges for women sprang up: Vassar in 1865, Smith and 
Wellesley in 1875, Radcliffe (the Harvard Annex) in 1882, and Bryn Mawr 
in 1885. In England, Queen's College was founded at London University 
in 1848, and Bedford in 1849. ki England as in America, the decade of the 
seventies saw great progress: Girton was opened at Cambridge in 1872, Lady 
Margaret Hall and Somerville opened at Oxford in 1879, and in 1874 a 
woman's school of medicine was founded in London. As the specific aim of 
these colleges was the education of women, they were at first more significant 
than co-education: in 1875 Vassar alone had as many women students en- 
rolled in its collegiate course as the eight state universities combined which 
admitted women. 20 In America, the land grant institutions were also 
capitulating to the demand and furnishing women with higher education, 
but as the public institutions admitted women largely out of their own eco- 
nomic need, the result of a decline in their male enrollment before and dur- 
ing the Civil War, rather than out of any special commitment toward their 
new students, and as for a long time they confined women to their "normal 

18 The Saturday Review, for example, flatly referred to the intellectual inferiority of 
women. But most of the argument was carried out on the gallant line of "concern" lest 
women lose their health or charm through higher learning. Most disagreement with the 
"usefulness" of opening higher education to women has a solid financial bottom: patri- 
archal economic and social arrangements both prevent women from malting large en- 
dowment contributions, or from putting professional education to use. The best account 
of the discussion is found in Mabel Newcomer's A Century of Higher Education for 
American Women (New York, Harcourt, 1959). 

19 See Flexner, op. cit., p, 34 and the Mount Holyoke College catalogue. 

20 Mabel Newcomer, of. cit., p. 20. 



76 SEXUAL POLITICS 

school" departments, they never came to feel any particular obligation to the 
education of women. 

In both countries the growth of higher education for women was the result 
of two factors: the opening of teaching to women, and feminist agitation. 21 
The spread of universal primary and secondary education was one of the 
great ideals of the nineteenth century. Since in both England and America, 
the cheapest system of public education was obtained through hiring women 
as schoolteachers, women had to be conceded better education if only so that 
they might teach children. Higher education for women on an equal basis 
with men was one of the feminists' chief objectives. Yet so fearful were its ad- 
vocates of compromising their cause, that they were occasionally timid about 
the more doubtful campaign for suffrage. 

One can say with considerable certainty that the sexual revolution would 
have had little impetus, the Woman's Movement still less, without the growth 
of higher education for women, one of the major achievements of the period. 
While the first phase gave women their initial opportunity for higher edu- 
cation, much impetus was lost in the reaction which followed. An equal 
education is yet to come. But even the taste of knowledge was sufficiently 
revolutionary to spark an enormous unrest and provide the movement with 
its leaders, a large number of whom came fresh from the new colleges. 

In order to explore the depth and complexity of the issue of education for 
women, literary sources are particularly illustrative. In England Tennyson's 
The Princess furnished the spectacle of a major poet composing a long 
work devoted to the problem. The poem tends to fall apart at its joints, 
leaving a heap of shining lyrics as its relic. In Tennyson's uneasy asides one 
finds sufficient evidence of his difficulty in deciding on the proper tone to 
adopt. Indeed, the subject matter, educational polemic, is hardly one that 
instantly recommends itself as poetic material. Tennyson starts out bravely 
enough in the vein of smug badinage. But immediately it begins to betray 
him. First of all, he grows a bit ashamed of his own levity. The opening of 
university education to women, a topic he was sure could afford nothing but 
comic material, begins to turn unexpectedly serious when he projects himself 
into his heroine's position. 

In his early poetry, Tennyson was fond of describing his own moods 
through lilylike maidens, Shalott, Mariana, etc. But in The Princess the fable 
becomes something of a case history of the poet's own problems of sexual 

21 In institutions originally exclusively male it was financial need which again opened 
doors to women during the Depression and World War II. In ending its long tradition of 
refusing women admission, Princeton recently named a similar reason, its need to compete 
in drawing power with co-educational colleges. In integrating, both Princeton and Yale 
proclaim (as Harvard has long done) a quota system against women applicants. Most 
co-educational colleges are thought to exercise quotas as well: they are simply mote 
discreet. 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



77 



identity. The prince who tells the story is not promising material— an epilep- 
tic with long golden curls who goes about in drag, and sings falsetto while 
courting. Tennyson veers between identifying with this paragon and the 
princess herself, also a poet, whose fierce desire for learning makes her a 
passionate and fairly commanding spirit. However, his initial "gamesome" 
tone rather soon begins to tire under the conflicts produced by Tennyson's 
own male chauvinism. A teasing patronization then gives way to a more ur- 
gent insecurity. 

Tennyson for a time is almost persuaded by the eloquence of Ida's feminism 
which comes through despite the heavy-handed burlesque under which he 
tries to drape it. Princess Ida is exciting .The poet's hero wishes to marry her, 
but he is not prepared to marry an equal. Siege must be laid to tame her into 
a docile but slightly above-average housewife whose additional accomplish- 
ment is a discarded bit of learning, abdicated to the higher cause of service to 
ego and his heirs. An unpleasant presentiment has occurred to the poet— 
what would happen to men if women were their intellectual equals'? Would 
they be rejected, no longer served and soothed? Ida's demand for equality in 
education is obviously cutting too close. In fact it might wreck Victorian 
marriage. Years later, Mill twitted anti-feminist resistance by saying that it 
regarded marriage— as it was— as so uninviting a proposition that all other 
options had to be closed to women, lest they refuse to marry. This might ap- 
pear to be mere sarcasm, but in fact chivalry did apprehend that women 
would cease to enter into marriage on the terms expected of them when edu- 
cation gave them other choices. That is why The Princess, in a curious, 
otherwise inexplicable manner proceeds to "change the subject" from edu- 
cation to marriage. Masculine security appears to depend on Tennyson's 
ability to turn the rebel's head from learning to love. 

Ida's almost humble request to be allowed to enter upon the cultural herit- 
age of civilization must be made to seem outrageous and grotesque. Tennyson 
insists on turning her woman's college hope of attaining intellectual equality 
into a separatist Amazon fantasy of his own, part mockery, part titillation. 
The poem makes use of a "framing" narrative device, and the tale of the 
princess herself is told by a bunch of undergraduates. There are songs in- 
terspersed throughout the text, the bulk of them frank propaganda for hearth 
and home and these latter morsels of domestic piety are placed in the mouths 
of the girls who listen— they are not otherwise permitted to intervene in the 
discussion of their fate, Tennyson's actual premise is that Ida may study or 
love; not both. As the male has no intention of sharing his university, the 
female can only set up her own artificial alternate culture, a project the poet 
regards as both futile and silly. He has loaded the question by blowing up 
the period's own solution of segregated education to the proportions of a 
totally segregated society. All this is an interesting comment on the Victorian 
feeling that the female must relinquish sexuality if she is to be in any sense 



78 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




autonomous, a variant on the bondage of "virtue" which demands sexual 
inhibition in a woman if she is to maintain her social and therefore her eco- 
nomic position. 

Having stumbled upon what remained disconcerting questions, Tennyson 
bundles the whole thing toward an awkward conclusion, for he seems to 
have an uneasy prescience that the entire system he calls "love" is in some 
danger. Princess Ida has flatly refused to marry the prince. The poet 
complicates the plot with side issues of "colorful" antiquarian character 
such as wars of rapine, property interests as big as kingdoms, forced mar- 
riages arranged by contract in childhood, and that species of masculine vanity 
called honor. The poet's choice of a pseudo-medieval setting in which to 
"debate" the "problem of woman" and her very present demand for educa- 
tional opportunity has the eEect of diluting a contemporary issue nearly to 
the point of insipidness. To fend off the troublesome implications he intuits 
lie in his subject, Tennyson is reduced to the expedient of having his hero 
wounded in a tournament and require the decorous attentions of a nurse- 
mother in order to recover. Ida is beaten when he plays dead. By feigning 
infantile helplessness he can convert his virago into the glowing image of 
mama, which the poem repeatedly exalts. This (to the Victorian sensibility) 
is perhaps safely asexual. In any case it fends off the peril of competition. 

As fantasy is the only vehicle which Tennyson can use to conduct his 
discussion, Ida is a shadowy princess abiding in a Cloud-Cuckoo-Land col- 
lege from which all men are rigidly excluded. Having invaded the sanctuary 
anyway, the prince has fallen desperately in love with her according to the 
hyperbole of chivalrous stereotype; her hair is somehow "a stately fretwork in 
the sun," despite the fact that it is black, and her companions are "a hundred 
airy does" ... all step with "tender feet, light as air," and so forth. 

But when the bargaining begins, and the prince shifts from courting to 
the marriage contract, the submission he wants to impose upon Ida is not 
forthcoming. Yet the conditions of the union are ones our poet and his 
readers would regard as just. With commendable logic Ida still refuses the 
swain who would coerce her. Tennyson then grows so nervous he turns Ida 
into an Amazon caricature. To complicate things and obscure the issue even 
further, the prince is fitted out with a father who is a male supremacist of the 
most vulgar and abusive variety: 

Man for the field and woman for the hearth; 
Man for the sword and for the needle she; 
Man with the head, and woman with the heart; 
Man to command, and woman to obey; 
All else confusion. 

The irascible old man sees in Ida a likely breeder of warriors, and advises 
his son to get her: 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 79 

Man is the hunter; woman is his game. 
The sleek and shining creatures of the chase, 
We hunt them for the beauty of their skins; 
They love us for it and we ride them down. 

With transparent falsity and a devious but strenuous attempt to be "fair," 
the poet urges the reader to side with the prince who is said to advocate 
moderation. He is really his father's boy, but a diplomat— "Wild natures need 
wise curbs"— who scoms open warfare. He will conquer through the subtle 
method of flattery, and when this fails, he can always play invalid until Ida 
capitulates and abandons her scheme of liberating education and takes up 
royal housewifery. The prince is too canny to parley over equality; he prefers 
to render inherent biological differences into pretty phrases which only dis- 
guise the old king's rigid categories. He would pretend to side-step the issue 
of status altogether. He sets up a theory of complementary difference, justi- 
fying cultural disparity through genital dissimilarity— "Either sex alone is half 
itself." Given the social circumstances of conditioning this is even the case 
with regard to personality; but Tennyson believes temperamental differences 
reside in nature. The male is thesis, the female antithesis— and marriage is 
synthesis. Together, the poet promises in a particularly banal figure, they 
will harmonize into "perfect music." He then insists that the fact of sexual 
dimorphism shall determine personality and role just as before: "For woman 
is not undevelopt, man, but diverse." The "diverse" is of course wonderfully 
familiar— Vive la difference. His bromide "Not like to like, but like to differ- 
ence" simply passes off traditional inequalities as interesting variety. Under 
this formulation the male will continue as of old to represent force, authority, 
and status, "the wrestling thews that throw the world," the female will go on 
at "childward care" as well as supplying the "childlike in the larger mind." 
Flattery gives way to insult. 

Under the force of sickbed sympathy, Ida says yes. Now thoroughly in 
command, the prince abandons the role of invalid. With great assurance he 
dismisses the subject of education altogether, by conceding woman only what 
one guesses to be the usual minimal literary finish — "all that not harms dis- 
tinctive womanhood." Ida's college is closed; the prince has co-opted all her 
theories with the unctuous ingenuity of the doctrine of the separate spheres. 

The dangers which masculine sensibility believes are inherent in equal 
educational opportunities could not be better displayed than here— nor the 
emotional strategies necessary to deal with and subvert them. One begins to 
understand how tactically vital is the chivalrous posture, its emphasis on 
heart and home and happy marriage— how desperately it rallied to the de- 
fense of the status quo. The Victorian belief in marriage— nearly an article 
of faith— is an attempt to beautify the traditional confinement of women at 
any cost. The cloying sweetness, the frenetic sentimentality, all conspire to 
hide the fact that this is only candy-coated sexual politics. 



8o 



SEXUAL P0UT1CS 




Political Organization 

After education, the next step was organization. It was the Abolitionist 
Movement which gave American women their first opportunity for political 
action and organization. In the United States, where the Woman's Move- 
ment began and from whence it spread to other Western countries and be- 
yond the Western world, it was the cause of eradicating slavery which 
provided the impetus for the emancipation of women. It was around this issue 
American women acquired their first political experience and developed the 
methods they were to use throughout most of their campaign and until the 
turn of the century: petition, and agitation carried on to educate the public. 
There is something logical in the fact that they should first band together 
for another cause than their own: it fulfills the "service ethic" in which they 
were indoctrinated. Slavery was probably the only circumstance in American 
life sufficiently glaring in its injustice and monumental evil to impel women 
to break that taboo of decorum which stifled and controlled them more effi- 
ciently than the coil of their legal, educational, and financial disabilities. 
Eleanor Flexner's Century of Struggle, the major scholarly history of women 
in the United States, assesses the campaign against slavery in these terms: 

It was in the abolition movement that women first learned to organize, to hold 
public meetings, to conduct petition campaigns. As abolitionists they first won 
the right to speak in public and began to evolve a philosophy of their place 
in society and of their basic rights. For a quarter of a century the two move- 
ments, to free the slave and to liberate the woman, nourished and strengthened 
one another. 22 

The first generation of feminists were active and dedicated abolitionists: the 
Grimke sisters, Lucy Stone, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and 
Susan B. Anthony. This does not, of course, imply that abolitionists were 
always remarkably sympathetic towards feminism. Frederick Douglass and 
Henry Blackwell were, Garrison too; but the plight of Lucy Stone is fairly 
typical— she was encouraged to speak on the rights of blacks during weekends 
for the larger crowds, but allowed to devote herself to the rights of women 
only on weekdays, lest her espousal of the latter detract from public support 
for the former. 23 

The Woman's Movement in America was officially inaugurated with the 
Seneca Falls convention of July 19 and 20, 1848. This meeting also grew 
out of abolition, for at the World Anti-Slavery Convention held in London 
in 1840, Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, mere women, were 

22 Flexner, op. cit., p. 41. Historians of the Woman's Movement are in agreement 
upon this. See also Mildred Adams, The Right to Be People (New York, Lippincott, 
1967) and Andrew Sinclair, The Emancipation of the American Woman (New York, 
Harper and Row, 196;). 

23 See Flexner, op. cit. 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 81 

excluded from the proceedings, 24 a circumstance that threw them together 
and into the alliance which resulted in the Seneca Falls adventure. Lucretia 
Mott was a Nantucket Quaker whose house served as a station on the under- 
ground railroad and a founder of the first female Anti-Slave Society. She 
was some twenty years older than Stanton, whom she coached to become the 
leading intellectual in the American movement. The "Statement of Senti- 
ments" composed at Seneca Falls began with a simple paraphrase of the 
Declaration of Independence. Seventy-five years after the American Revolu- 
tion, women were daring to apply this document to themselves, extending 
its premises— the proposition of inalienable human rights and the legitimacy 
of government relying upon the consent of the governed— even, and at last 
to their own case. The reforms they advocated here and in the women's 
rights conventions which began to spring up everywhere, were control of 
their earnings and the right to own property, access to education and divorce, 
the guardianship of their children, and most explosively, the demand for 
suffrage. Of the 250 women who met at Seneca Falls, only one, a nineteen- 
year-old seamstress named Charlotte Woodward, lived to vote for president in 
1920. 25 The Wesleyan chapel which saw the birth of a great national and 
international movement is now a gas station, marked only by a sign on the 
sidewalk. And yet, in the sense of formal politics, the first insurrectionary 
gathering of the revolution had taken place. 

Through a New York Herald Tribune account of a Woman's Rights Con- 
vention at Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1850, the news of practical political 
organization reached Harriet Taylor in London, who greeted the event with 
enthusiasm in the Westminster Review. But there were still no feminist 
societies formed in England until the sixties. Mill presented the first 
suffrage petition to Parliament in 1866 and published his Sttbjection of 
Women in 1869. The movement now had strong and growing roots in Eng- 
land. It was given a wider international character when Susan B. Anthony 
began the international feminist movement during 3 visit abroad in r883. 
Carrie Chapman Catt gave much of her life to the international, and in the 
years of reaction after suffrage was won in America, an international 
woman's movement continued to function through various organizations, its 
latest manifestation the United Nations Committee on the Status of Women. 
By 1920 the number of nations who had granted some form of civil rights 

24 Their public exclusion and the denial of their "recognition as persons" dramatized 
the situation of women before delegates from all over the world. Furious, Garrison left 
the convention and sat with the women. See Abbie Graham, Ladies in Revolt (New York, 
The Woman's Press, 1934). 

25 A farm girl who plied her trade at home, Woodward has left a record of how she 
felt: "I can say that every fiber of my being rebelled, although silently, all the hours I 
sat and sewed gloves for a miserable pittance which, after it was earned, could never be 
mine. I wanted to work, but I wanted to choose my task, and I wanted to collect my 
wages. That was my form of rebellion against the life into which I was born." Quoted 
in Sinclair, op. cit., p. 60. 



82 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




and the franchise to women was 26; by 1964 it was 104. Though it continues 
to be largely ignored, a profound social change had come about, its seed 
sown in nineteenth -century England and America. 

In the long and tortuous years of campaigning for a whole series of 
reforms, the final and signal achievement of the woman's movement came 
to lie in winning the franchise. The best-known, the most specific, and the 
best-documented aspect of the first phase of the sexual revolution, a historical 
field in its own right, the story has been told many times, often well. 26 In 
broad outline, there was a considerable similarity between the movements 
in England and America, both as regards tactics and the split that developed 
between the "constitutional" and the "militant" wings. Until well into this 
century the woman's movement had worked only through the slow, perse- 
vering methods of petition, pamphleteering, speechmaking and a careful can- 
vas and appeal for male votes in local elections and in the debates of Congress 
and Parliament. But the task of "educating" the public was long, seemingly 
endless. The apparent futility of their quiet patience provoked the need for 
more spectacular methods: mass demonstrations, parades, pickets. An in- 
creasing frustration with disingenuous governmental delay led the Pank- 
hursts' English "suffragette" group to adopt the tactics of disruption and 
arrest, finally the theatrics of arson and window breaking. In America, mem- 
bers of Alice Paul's rather less desperate militant group, the Congressional 
Union, suffered arrest and abuse for quietly picketing the White House in 
wartime. There is much disagreement about the value of the militants' con- 
tribution. It is probable militant methods were necessary to keep the issue 
alive over so long and discouraging a campaign; they were unquestionably 
important for the public sympathy they enlisted when government replied to 
them with police brutality, harsh prison terms, and forced feeding for hunger 
strikers. Even in their angriest moods, Engilsh and American suffragettes 
were violent toward property rather than persons, and in its more general 
use of nonviolent methods the Woman's Movement had hit upon tactics 
which went beyond the methods of earlier reform movements, and may even 
possibly have provided later political leaders and causes with an example: 
Gandhi, the Union Movement, and Civil Rights. 

The friends of the suffrage movement in America were a mixed lot: in the 
West, populism and the frontier spirit; in the Middle West, temperance; 
in the East, reform. In England, the Liberal party seemed a friend until it 
had the power of office; Labour was sympathetic. Nowhere would a party 
commit itself. The enemies of the suffrage movement were also an interesting 

26 As well as Flexner, Adams, and Sinclair, op. cit. (American), see Roger Fulford, 
Votes for Women (London, Faber, 1957) and Ray Strachey, The Cause (London, 
1928) for short histories of the Woman's Movement in England. Further analysis of the 
American Movement can be found in William J. O'Neill's Everyone Was Brave (Chi- 
cago. Quadrangle, 1968), and Aileen Kraditor's The Ideas of the Woman's Suffrage 
Movement (New York, Columbia University Press, 1965). 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



83 



group: Southern racists fearful of the votes of black women, middle-western 
liquor interests, eastern capitalism, and machine politics. In the last two there 
was considerable, finally largely unjustified anxiety, that women might play 
a strong role in unionization and political reform. Corporations opposed the 
vote for women, and like the liquor trust stood willing to finance anti-suffrage 
campaigns; both were rash enough to leave the evidence behind. 27 

The moderate wing of the American suffrage movement became the 
League of Women Voters, Looking back on the objectives of the League in 
its early years, there is some evidence women were effective at first in 
gaining a measure of the sort of legislative reform for which they needed the 
vote: the protection of women in industry, child welfare, child labor laws, 
social hygiene, collective bargaining, minimum wage laws, pure food laws, 
honest election practices, municipal reform, compulsory education, and a uni- 
fication of the laws concerning the civil status of women. 28 In the twentieth 
century tide of welfare and reform legislation, the enfranchisement of women 
probably did play some role and had some actual effect: what is disturbing 
is that it has not had more. When their constitutional amendment for a strong 
child-labor law failed to attain state ratification in 1934, the League had al- 
ready entered its decline. As a deliberately non-partisan group it did not or 
could not make use of the ballot for direct purposes of women's self- 
interest as other interest groups traditionally have done. Since public feeling, 
together with party practices (and women's growing new reticence in the 
face of both), combined to prevent candidacy or election to office for women, 
the vote grew more and more meaningless as reaction set in. Prejudice 
against the employment of women (a group of workers still generally out- 
side the union movement) mounted during the Depression and was repeated 
again after the Second World War. In the fifties anti-feminism culminated 
in a fairly solid feeling against women's participation in public life. The 
groundswell of the Woman's Movement was utterly spent by then. "Feminist" 
became a derogatory term. 

The cause of suffrage was the focal point of the formal politics of the first 
phase of the sexual revolution; around it were marshaled other issues such as 
education, equality before the law, and equal pay. One must recognize the 
central significance of the franchise in that it aroused the greatest opposi- 
tion and mobilized the greatest consciousness and effort. Yet in many ways it 
was the red herring of the revolution— a wasteful drain on the energy of sev- 
enty years. Because the opposition was so monolithic and unrelenting, the 
struggle so long and bitter, the vote took on a disproportionate importance. 
And when the ballot was won, the feminist movement collapsed in what can 

27 See Alan P. Grimes, The Puritan Ethic and Woman Suffrage (New York, Oxford, 
1967) and Flexner, crp. cit. Both authors substantiate the charge. 

28 Adams, op. cit., p. 191. 



84 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



4 



only be described as exhaustion. 29 The suffrage campaign reminds one of 
nothing so much as a flat tire encountered early on a long journey— a flat 
which takes so much time, labor, and expense to repair that the journey is 
dejectedly abandoned. Aileen Kraditor has documented the type of co-option 
and collusion to which the American suffragists were driven in their despera- 
tion to achieve that imperative "next step" which took so long to take that 
it engulfed the whole movement. The second generation of suffragists were 
pioneers like the first, but a newer, more conventional breed. Suffrage be- 
came respectable, "smart," even possible, if one were willing to play politics 
and make the requisite compromises. The compromises were decidedly un- 
palatable: unsavory understandings with southern racism to win congres- 
sional votes from the southern states, a grating irony in a movement whose 
origins were in abolition. And as the machine-held districts where new im- 
migrant populations were centered voted time and time again against the 
option of granting suffrage to them, native American women became bitter 
for a time against the foreign-bom. 30 

If suffrage's ability to limit a whole social revolution to one issue was a 
great fault, the bourgeois character of the movement was another. Never, 
even at the last, was it sufficiently involved with working women, the most 
exploited group among its numbers. Although the women's suffrage move- 
ment did have moments of solidarity which cut across class lines in a way 
quite new to American politics, probably never recaptured again until Civil 
Rights, the hopelessly exploited character of female employment today is 
proof of its shortcoming in labor organization. Certain nearly inevitable 
factors contributed to its too frequently middle-class character; generally only 
women of this class enjoyed the leisure and education necessary for the endless 
effort the suffrage battle demanded. 31 

The chief weakness of the movement's concentration on suffrage, the 
factor which helped it to fade, disappear, and even lose ground when the 

26 The same phenomenon may be observed in abolition and black emancipation; agita- 
tion here produced only literal manumission after sixty years of effort. The gains of 1868 
were withdrawn or ended in the next hundred years. It took some sixteen years of Civil 
Rights work to restore to black Americans those rights that had been conceded them a 
century before. In Carrie Chapman Catt's triumphant speech dismissing the crowd of 
American suffragists, one can also detect overconfidence and short-sightedness: "Now we 
will all go our separate ways ... I have lived to see the great dream of my li£e— the 
enfranchisement of women. We are no longer petitioners, we are not wards of the nation, 
but free and equal citizens." Quoted in Adams op. cit., p. 170. 

30 Aileen Kraditor, The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement, iSjio-ipio (New 
York, Columbia University, 1965). 

31 Catt estimated that there were 56 campaigns to referendum, 480 campaigns to get 
legislatures to submit suffrage to voters, 47 campaigns to get state constitutional con- 
ventions to include woman's suffrage, 277 campaigns to get state party conventions to add 
a suffrage plank, and 19 campaigns to 19 successive Congresses. See Carrie Chapman 
Catt and Nettie Rogers Shuler Woman Suffrage and Politics (New York, Scribner's, 
1913). P- 107. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



85 



vote was gained, lay in its failure to challenge patriarch al ideology at a suf- 
ficiently deep and radical level to break the conditioning processes of status, 
temperament and role. A reform movement, and especially one which has 
fixed its attention on so minimal an end as the ballot, the sort of superficial 
change which legislative reform represents, and which, when it has attained 
this, becomes incapable even to putting it to use, is hardly likely to propose 
the sweeping radical changes in society necessary to bring about the comple- 
tion of a sexual revolution— changes in social attitudes and social structure, in 
personality and institutions. Marriage was preserved nearly intact despite 
women's new legal rights within it, and divorce. The "home" was still credita- 
ble enough to be refurbished in gleaming colors in the ensuing period of 
reaction. Although they felt they had escaped economic dependence as far 
as "the right to work," women were not yet able to pursue the question all 
the way to equal rights in work; nor did they continue to view work as re- 
sponsibility or a fundamental social contribution. In affluence or before social 
pressure, they returned to idleness or dependency. The next generation found 
it easy to exploit women as a "reserve labor force," bringing them out to the 
job when it suited a wartime economy, and sending them back to the "home" 
when it didn't. Most crucial of all, the whole elaborate processes of sexual 
"socialization" were left in such good repair that they could be reorganized 
into newer and more subtle patterns of control. Despite the reform of its legal 
system and the (finally minor) humiliation to its political pride, the patri- 
archal mentality reasserted itself with great strength at the end of the first 
phase. Patriarchy, reformed or unreformed, is patriarchy still: its worst abuses 
purged or foresworn, it might be actually more stable and secure than before. 

Employment 

The issue of women's entrance into the professions is a spectacular case 
of the contradictions in the chivalrous mentality with which the sexual revo- 
lution had to contend. Women have always worked. They have generally 
worked longer hours for smaller rewards and at less agreeable tasks than 
have men. The issue of employment during the period of the first phase was 
simply theiT demand that they be paid for their efforts, have an opportunity 
to enter the most prestigious fields of work, and when paid be allowed to re- 
tain and control their earnings. Even before the industrial revolution brought 
them to the factory, women had always done menial labor, most of it physi- 
cally exhausting and tedious, much of it agricultural. Yet chivalry's accessory 
police ethic, "decorum" found it outrageous for a 'lady" to use her mind 
rather than her hands and back. Such powerful feeling against such infrac- 
tion of taboo affords a glimpse of how economically and politically useful ta- 
boo can be. In embarking upon the intellectually and socially responsible 
employment which the professions constituted, pioneers in each field met 
with ruthless and nearly overwhelming opposition in law, medicine, science, 
scholarship, and architecture. 



¦ iu 



86 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



If among the middle classes the obsessive fetish of decorum could be dam- 
aging to women's own interests, among the working class the passivity it im- 
plied took another form— despair, When the settlement houses began to 
reach the poor, they found, much as they would find today, that the 
women were at the bottom of the heap among slum dwellers; no one was 
paid less or needed unions more desperately than the women, more often 
unskilled and held back by the more severely inhibiting traditions of Euro- 
pean patriarchy. Inured to servitude, they were listless and afraid to pursue 
their own interests, no matter how great their suffering. One of the pioneers 
in labor organization reported the situation in these depressing terms: 

. . . the habit of submission and acceptance without question of any terms 
offered them, with the pessimistic view of life in which they see no ray of hope. 
Such people cannot be said to live, as living means the enjoyment of nature's 
gifts, but they simply vegetate like partially petrified creatures . . . many women 
are deterred from joining labor organizations by foolish pride, prudish modesty, 
and religious scruples; and a prevailing cause, which applies to all who are in 
the flush of womanhood, is the hope and expectancy that in the near future 
marriage will lift them out of the industrial life to the quiet and comfort of a 
home, foolishly imagining that with marriage their connection with and interest 
in labor matters end; often finding, however, that their struggle has only begun 
when they have to go back to the shop for two instead of one. All this is the 
result or effect of the environments and conditions surrounding women in the 
past and present, and can be removed only by constant agitation and educa- 
tion. 32 

Both in England and America investigations of the conditions of women 
and child labor had all along brought an appalled public response. This was 
particularly true in Britain where Parliament conducted hearings and pub- 
lished blue books of its findings for decades. The result was the beginning 
of modern protective legislation, curbing the greed of capitalist laissez faire 
policy, and finally assuring minimum standards of decent working conditions 
for all workers, men as well as women. While men, women and children 
benefited hugely from reform, men benefited still more from the labor move- 
ment, whereas women did not. Working women needed unions even more 
than they needed votes, but the labor movement showed (and still shows) 
remarkably little interest in organizing them. As unorganized and notori- 
ously cheap labor, cheap enough to be used to undersell male labor, women, 
when they were permitted to work, could also be more easily exploited in 
labor or more easily fired, laid off, or pushed out when it was convenient not 
to permit them to work. 33 

32 Proceedings of the Knights of Labor, "Report of General Investigator of Women's 
Work and Wages," 1886, pp. 155-56. Leonara Barry is the reporter. Quoted in Hexner, 
op. tit., pp. 190-200. 

33 Things have not changed very much. In America, among the occupations in which 
women are employed, there is either no union to protect them, as with domestics, typists, 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



87 



One of the first major labor reforms was legislation limiting the hours of 
work. 8 * But in both England and America, most agitation for the improve- 
ment of the barbarous circumstances under which women worked was car- 
ried out with essential disregard of their human rights as workers, and in- 
stead, typically preferred to put its emphasis either on the indecorum of their 
shocking and disorganized lives, or on the subversive effects their working 
conditions must have on their breeding ability, their service to infants, their 
"morals" or "virtue." In many places there was real sympathy for the sufferings 
of women in industry, but a great deal of the motivation behind reform 
was little more than protection of patriarchal culture and institutions: family 
structure was becorning disrupted (including the authority of the father as 
provider and head of household); women in industry had access to sexual 
freedom; they were worked too hard in one circumstance (the factory) to 
serve properly in another (the home). 86 The prevailing male attitude in 
both countries seemed to find the perfect remedy in getting women out of 
the factory altogether and back into the safety of the "home." 

It is important to understand that economic independence was consciously 
as well as unconsciously perceived to be a direct threat to male authority. 
The freedom of sexual choice, the competence and self-sufficiency of a skilled 
woman worker, single and receiving top wages, was possibly as frightening 
to certain onlookers as the ghastly poverty of the majority of women factory 
workers, harassed by family duties, and ridden with disease or malnutrition. 
The second might be handy exempla of the follies of earning your own 
living; the first could only entice one to freedom. A number of observers 
have pointed out that the elite women of the working class fared rather 
better than those women of the middle class who were driven to the humili- 
ations of govemessing with its low pay, servant status and eternal spying 
supervision. se 

In few cases, or none, was it ever an affair of moment to those in power 

and stenographers, or one too weak or corrupt to give them real assistance, as with retail 
clerks and waitresses. Nowhere else in American employment is pay differential so great 
as it is between unionized male employment and the unprotected female occupations; by 
comparison, even the professions treat women with a semblance of fairness, some actually 
feel their discrimination is better concealed. 

8* Both men and women benefited here from child labor law for as the number of 
hours permitted to the young in factory labor decreased, it became necessary to limit those 
of adults doing tasks which depended upon the child labor force as well. 

86 See Neal J. Smelser, Social Structure and the Industrial Revolution (University of 
Chicago, 1959, see particularly Chapters K-XI). Neff, op. tit. and the Blue Books 
bear this out. One must remember too that woman's domestic "work" was (and is) 
never seen as work, with the dignity that term implies in a market or money economy— 
and that it was always there to be done, no matter how many hours she might spend 
employed outside her home. Hired domestics, who made up a large part of the female 
labor force during this period, lived under conditions very near to serfdom. 

86 This is attested to in the more perceptive and sympathetic social literature of the 
period and borne out in Neff, op. tit. 



88 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



enacting measures for their protection, that women have beneficial condi- 
tions so that they might enjoy or profit from meaningful work; still less were 
they concerned with equality between the sexes, least of all in the matter of 
wages. About all the chivalrous reform which was finally accomplished there 
was a frequently patronizing air of concessions made to the physically in- 
ferior. Women and children are generally lumped together in Parliamentary 
blue books: both had the status of minors. Louis Brandeis' famous "Oregon 
Brief" which won a decisive victory for protective legislation in America is 
based on the smug assumption that "women are fundamentally weaker than 
men in all that makes for endurance, in muscular strength, in nervous energy, 
in the power of persistent application and attention. 37 . . . History dis- 
closes the fact that woman has always been dependent on man . . . Differen- 
tiated by these matters from the other sex, she is properly placed in a class by 
herself, and sustained even when like legislation is not necessary for men 
and could not be sustained. It is impossible to close one's eyes to the fact that 
she still looks to her brother and depends on him." 38 

English and American studies of the period cannot help but persuade one 
that women workers were habitually rescued for what amounted to the wrong 
reasons. Yet the fact remains that the sexual revolution began to accomplish 
a great deal for women economically. Despite the dreadful hardships of ex- 
ploitative and discriminatory employment, they attained through it a mea- 
sure of that economic, social, and psychological independence which is the 
sine qua non of freedom. 



POLEMICAL 



Mill Versus Ruskin 

Had the older, cynical expressions of male supremacy continued to carry 
much weight, a first phase of sexual revolution might never have taken place. 
Instead, the struggle was carried out between two opposing camps, rational 
and chivalrous, each of them claiming to have at heart the best interests of 
both sexes and the larger benefit of society. Just as it was enlightening to 
contrast the chivalrous attitude with the reality of women's economic and 

" Decision of the United States Supreme Court in Curt Muller vs. the State of 
Oregon, U.S. 412, 421, 422 (1908) and Brief for the State of Oregon by Louis D. 
Brandeis. 

36 Ihid. The doctrine that "sex is a valid basis for classification" enunciated in the 
Muller case has always been one open to abuse. Protective legislation enacted for their 
benefit has often been used to discriminate against women: regulations on the hours of 
work or limitations on weights they can lift can become "reasons" why they may not work 
overtime, be promoted, etc. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



8 9 



legal situation— the result of such paternalism— it should be quite as revealing 
to compare two of the central documents of sexual politics in the Victorian 
period-Mill's Subjection of Women, and Ruskin's "Of Queen's Gardens." 30 
Compressed within these two statements is nearly the whole range and possi- 
bility of Victorian thought on the subject. 

In Mill one encounters the Tealism of sexual politics, in Ruskin its romance 
and the benign aspect of its myth. Much of the other portion of Victorian 
sexual myth is included in Ruskin by implication, for his virtuous matron 
relies for her very existence on that spectral figure of the temptress, her com- 
plement in the period's dichotomous literary fantasy— just as in life, the two 
classes of women, wife and whore, account for the socio-sexual division 
under the double standard. If Mill's essay recommends itself for its lucid state- 
ment of an actual situation, Ruskin's lecture recommends itself as one of the 
most complete insights obtainable into that compulsive masculine fantasy one 
might call the official Victorian attitude. Its other side, the darker side of male 
attitude, can be found in fiction, and especially in poetry. The dark woman, 
the period avatar of feminine evil, lurks there in subterranean menace, sta- 
tioned at intervals all the way from Tennyson's verse to the more scabrous 
pornography of the age. But the daytime lady in "Of Queen's Gardens" is an 
expression of the more normative beliefs of the Victorian middle class at 
the moment of their most optimistic and public profession. 

It must always be understood that the sexual revolution made headway 
slowly and against enormous odds of cultural resistance. While the Victorian 
period is the first in history to face the issue of patriarchy and the condition 
of women under its rule, it did so in a bewildering variety of ways: coura- 
geously and intelligently as in Mill and Engels; half-heartedly as in the tepid 
criticism of the novelists who describe it, with bland disingenuousness as in 
Ruskin; or with turbulent ambivalence as in the poets Tennyson, Rossetti, 
Swinburne, and Wilde. Intermittent degrees and variations on all these pat- 
terns are to be found everywhere, and the subject is a vexed and difficult one. 
Dickens, for example, achieved a nearly perfect indictment of both pa- 
triarchy and capitalism in Dombey and Son, a novel virtually inspired by the 
phenomenon of prenatal preference, and a superb illustration of Engels' state- 

30 John Stuart Mill, The Subjection of Women (1869), reprinted in Three Essays hy 
/. S. Mill, World's Classics Series (London, Oxford University Press, 1966). John 
Ruskin's "Of Queen's Gardens" in Sesame and Lilies, first published in 1865, reprinted 
in an American edition (Homewood Publishing Company, 1902). After having found 
in "Of Queen's Gardens" a representative, and perhaps even a definitive expression of 
the chivalrous position, it is pleasant to discover that so distinguished a Victorian scholar 
as Walter Houghton is in agreement as to its significance in the period: "This lecture of 
Ruskin's is the most important single document I know for the characteristic idealization 
of love, women, and the home in Victorian thought." Walter Houghton, The Victorian 
Frame of Mind (Yale, 1957), p. 343. In view of the present neglect of this work (Vic- 
torian scholars tend to look embarrassed when it is mentioned), it is material to recall 
that Sesame and Lilies was also Ruskin's most popular volume. 



! , 



9° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




ments on the subordination of women within the system of property. Yet 
Dickens did this without ever relinquishing the sentimental version of women 
which is the whole spirit of Ruskin's "Of Queen's Gardens." It is one of the 
more disheartening flaws in the master's work that nearly all the "serious" 
women in Dickens' fiction, with the exception of Nancy and a handful of her 
criminal sisters, are insipid goodies carved from the same soap as Ruskin's 
Queens. Indeed, an acquaintance with Ruskin's "Of Queen's Gardens" is a 
great aid in the study of Victorian fiction. 

One is tempted to see in Victorian chivalry a transition phase between the 
open male supremacy of earlier ages, such as the bullying license of the 
Regency, and the revolutionary climate of the early twentieth century 
when feminism was at its height While one might object that it is to this lat- 
ter period which Mill and Engels belong in spirit, they wrote in 1869 and 
1884 respectively, and their very modem books were also products of the 
Victorian era, however advanced or before their time they may appear. The 
realities they deal in were ones that impinged on Victorian sensibility very 
acutely, either directly through the growing feminist agitation for reform, or 
indirectly in the strictures on women's social and legal disabilities which be- 
gan to appear in the novel. Among the poets the effects of change are mir- 
rored in the unconscious fantasies of a masculine sensibility often guilty, re- 
sentful, or at bay, and driven to compensatory myths of feminine evil, while 
among women writers one sees the new ideas producing a growing restless- 
ness and rebellion at their condition. 

Ruskin presented his lecture at the Town Hall of Manchester in 1864 be- 
fore a mixed audience of middle-class men and women. It appeared in book 
form with the publication of Sesame and Lilies in 1865, and was reissued in 
1 871 with an additional preface perfumed with Ruskin's middle-aged infatu- 
tion over Rose La Touche, with whom he had fallen in love back in 1858, 
when she was nine and he thirty-nine years of age. That the beaming gallan- 
try in "Of Queen's Gardens" has often the aspect of senile eroticism address- 
ing itself to beautiful ignorance should perhaps call for litde astonishment in 
an age when every woman was legally a minor. 

Despite the lavish flattery with which Ruskin approaches the women in his 
audience, a group of bourgeoises whom he addresses with grating regularity 
as "Queens," he had in fact felt and probably smarted under the pressure of 
feminist insurgence. 'There never was a time when wilder words were 
spoken or more vain imagination permitted respecting this question" he be- 
moans—the "question" is of course "the 'rights' of women," Ruskin fussily 
putting rights in quotation marks. 40 

40 Ruskin op, tit., p. 128. The preface O871) refers to further "questions" which 
have arisen since the lecture "respecting the education and claims of women." These 
have "greatly troubled simple minds and excited restless ones." Disdaining to pursue such 
nonsense, Ruskin proceeds to harangue the female reader on virtue, his tone growing 
didactic ("Take out your Latin dictionary and look out "sollenis" and fix the word well 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



91 



Assuring us at the outset that he is no crude chauvinist, Ruskin asserts 
that he is steering a middle course. He seems to direct his efforts against the 
"left" of feminism and the effect of his lecture should be to refute it with the 
courtly platitude that women are loved and honored, have nothing to com- 
plain of and are even royalty, so long as they stay at home. His strategy ap- 
pears to be an attempt to subvert the new heresy through the doctrine of the 
"separate spheres," the period's most ingenious mechanism for restraining in- 
surgent women. 

Mill did not speak for queens, nor was he arrested at the nubile level of 
Rose La Touche. The Subjection of Women was written in 1861, three years 
before "Of Queen's Gardens," but as Mill took great care in the timing of his 
books, it was not published until 1869, two years before Ruskin reprinted 
his own statement Mill composed his essay in collaboration with his step- 
daughter, Helen Taylor, and claimed that his own part in it was largely 
inspired by his wife, Harriet Taylor. There is no reason to doubt that the 
knowledge of female psychology which infuses the book required a woman's 
assistance, but the style and the logic are Mill's own. The Subjection of 
Women is a reasoned and eloquent statement of the actual position of 
women through history as well as an attack on the conditions of legal bond- 
age, debilitating education, and the stifling ethic of "wifely subjection" within 
the Victorian period. It is argued as powerfully as the essay On Liberty and is 
as full of Mill's splendidly controlled humanist outrage as any of his state- 
ments on slavery or serfdom, to which he draws frequent parallels. 

A political realist, Mill was quite aware of the revolutionary character of 
his thesis: 

That the principle which regulates the existing social relations between the two 
sexes— the legal subordination of one sex to the other— is wrong in itself, and 
now one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to 
be replaced by a principle of perfect equality, admitting no power or privilege 
on the one side, nor disability on the other.* 1 

This was a drastic recommendation to make then, just as it is now, and Mill 
was fully awake to the resistance he would meet, the appalled uproar, the 
irrationality of the old school, chauvinist or chivalrous, neither of whom 
would have dreamed of producing real evidence for their assertion that 
things were quite as they should be between man and woman. Mill even pre- 
dicts the uncritical bigotry of the opposition: "In every respect the burden is 
hard on those who attack an almost universal opinion. They must be very 
fortunate as well as unusually capable if they obtain a hearing at all." 42 For 

in your mind") and even punitive ("Of all the insolent, all the foolish persuasions that 
hy any chance could enter and hold your empty little heart"), etc Preface, pp. 9, 10, 13. 

41 Mill, op. «(., p. 427. 

42 MiU, op. rat., p. 418. 



Q2 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



93 



in 

¦¦' h-i i 



all his extraordinary capability, Mill was scarcely fortunate before a male 
audience: the reaction in the reviews was disastrous; he was denounced as 
mad or immoral, often as both. 43 

I The Problem of Nature 

Reason has always been an intruder in the area of sexual prejudice. Rus- 
kin, who was by no means a stupid man, has recourse to less intellectual en- 
ergy in "Of Queen's Gardens" than anywhere else in his work. In turning his 
mind toward Lilies it was enough for him to rely on sentiment, a vague nos- 
talgia about the heroic middle ages, and saccharine assertions about The 
Home. Mill remarks that one of the most tedious and characteristic mental 
habits of the nineteenth century is its reaction against eighteenth-century 
rationalism, and its quirk of trusting instead to "the unreasoning elements in 
human nature." 14 Ruskin's lecture is a demonstration of this observation. 

If Ruskin may be said to have a thesis, it is altogether a simpler affair than 
Mill's, calculated to stroke rather than ruffle his listeners. Beginning with the 
rather complacent assumption that the educated middle classes exercise a 
"kingship" over the "illguided and illiterate," Ruskin's task is simply to di- 
vide a little section of the realm off for Queens, or as he is pleased to put it, 
determine "what special portion of this royal authority, arising out of noble 
education, may be rightly possessed by women." 45 If there was just an ele- 
ment of pandering to social pretension in the industrialists he had addressed 
as "kings," Ruskin is unrestrained in the unction he directs toward his 
female hearers, who "if they rightly understood and exercised this royal or 
gracious influence, the order and beauty induced by such benignant power 
would justify us in speaking of the territories over which each of them reigned 
as 'Queen's Gardens.'" 46 

In professing that one cannot conclude what the "queenly power of 
women should be until we are agreed what their ordinary power should 
be," 4T Ruskin is only saying that the role of upper- and middle-class female is 
dependent on the nature and abilities of the female herself. Were these equal 

43 A reviewer rebuked Mill for his interest in "the strangest" and the "most ignoble 
and mischievous of all the popular feelings of the age," another was incredulous that Mill 
could imagine the relations of men and women might ever "work on a purely voluntary 
principle," while others found the book indecent. Thirty years later it could still be 
anathematized as "rank moral and social anarchy." See Michael St. John Packe, The Life 
of John Stuart Mill (New York, Macmillan, 1954), p. 495. Mill's biographer comments: 
"Of anything Mill ever wrote, The Subjection of Women aroused the most antagonism." 
Ibid. Women received the book rather differently than did men; the Woman's Movement 
welcomed it as a handmade text. 

44 Mill, op. cit., p. 430. 

45 Ruskin, op. cit., pp. 1 2,5, 1 26, 1 27. (The preceding lecture, "Of King's Treasuries," 
dealing with education and poverty and addressed largely to men, is excellent and by no 
means complacent: nothing could afford a greater contrast than the two pieces.) 

**lbid., p. 127. 
"Ibid. 



to the male's, she could be a full member of the elite, not just the auxiliary he 
proposes, It was precisely to avoid the danger of sexual equality within this or 
any other class, that he and his fellows invented the doctrine of the separate 
spheres and proclaimed it "Nature." The two great poles of influence in the 
Victorian period are Mill and Carlyle. Frequently at odds with the rational 
tradition which Mill represents, Ruskin, following Carlyle, tends to rely 
more upon emotionalism than reason. And to those under Carlyle's influence 
Nature is not only an emotional term, but all too often an eminently con- 
venient gadget which can be directed at random to justify class, absolutism, 
feudalism, or any other system they choose to endorse. Ruskin was never a 
democrat like Mill. 48 Instead, he combined moral outrage against the plight 
of the poor with an excited longing for the heroism and grace he found in 
aristocratic and medieval revivalism. Yet at his best moments he transcends 
this snobbery altogether in a splendid compassion for the poor, Biblical in the 
energy of its denunciation of Philistine avarice. 

As he is far too canny to speak openly of sexual status, Ruskin arrives at it 
inevitably through adhering to traditional sexual stereotype in role and tem- 
perament. However silly and old-fashioned his phraseology may appear, his 
tactic is perennially popular; it re-emerged in more sophisticated terms in 
the period of reaction which set in with the 1930s. He immediately renounces 
all claims to speak of the "superiority" of one sex to another, as if they 
could be compared in similar things. "Each has what the other has not; 
each completes the other- They are in nothing alike, and the happiness and 
perfection of both depends on each asking and receiving from the other 
what the other only can give." 49 This sounds nice enough until one remem- 
bers it is the threadbare tactic of justifying social and temperamental differ- 
ences by biological ones. For the sexes are inherently in everything alike, save 
reproductive systems, secondary sexual characteristics, orgasmic capacity, and 
genetic and morphological structure. Perhaps the only things they can 
uniquely exchange are semen and transudate. One would like to be sure it 
was not upon this method of barter that Ruskin intended to construct his 
social economy. 

Having through mere assertion "proven" that the sexes are complementary 
opposites, Ruskin then proceeds to map out their worlds, reserving the entire 
scope of human endeavor for the one, and a little hothouse for the other: 

Now their separate characters are briefly these. The man's power is active pro- 
gressive, defensive. He is eminently the doer, the creator, the discoverer, the 
defender. His intellect is for speculation and invention; his energy for adventure, 

48 "I am, and my father was before me, a violent Tory of the old school— Walter 
Scott's school, that is to say, and Homer's," John Ruskin, Praeterita, reprinted in part in 
The Genius of John Puskin, Selections from his writings edited by John D. Rosenberg 
(Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1963), p. 461. 

« Ruskin, "Of Queen's Gardens," p. 143- 



94 SEXUAL POLITICS 

for war and for conquest . . . But the woman's power is for rule, not for battle 
and her intellect is not for invention or recreation, but sweet ordering, arrange- 
ment, and decision ... By her office and place, she is protected from all danger 
and temptation. The man, in his rough work in the open world, must en- 
counter all peril and trial— to him therefore must be the failure, the offence, 
the inevitable error; often he must be wounded or subdued, often misled, and 
always hardened. 50 

Of course Ruskin has not only glossed over the fact of ruler and ruled in 
pretentious and inflated language. He has also deliberately confused the cus- 
tomary with the natural, the convenient with the inevitable. Mill is awaie 
that the culturally created distinctions of temperament and role underlie 
and support the invidious distinctions of sexual status, and are indeed the 
latter's method of inculcation and perpetuation. He also believes that the 
practice of splitting male and female humanity into two neat little divisions 
and calling the distinctions in their social and intellectual situation "Nature" 
is pre-eminently a political gesture. 

To those who might object to his comparisons with other "forms of unjust 
power" Mill answers that the master class have always regarded their privi- 
leges as natural; Aristotle could see no harm in slavery— nor could the Ameri- 
can planter class. Both justified their injustices on the grounds of nature and 
insisted the subordinate group were bom to their position and reserved for it 
by God. Monarchy was often defended on the same grounds as springing 
from a still more ancient patriarchal authority still more "natural": "So true is 
this that the unnatural generally means only uncustomary, and that every- 
thing which is usual appears natural. The subjection of women to men being 
a universal custom, any departure from it quite naturally appears un- 
natural." 51 

Ruskin's whole structure of complementary and separate spheres based on 
natural proclivity is undermined by Mill's logical objection that nothing can 
be known of the inherent nature of a personality so subject to— as to be vir- 
tually created by— circumstantial conditioning: 

Standing on the ground of common sense and the constitution of the human 
mind, I deny that anyone knows, or can know, the nature of the two sexes, 
so long as they have only been seen in their present relation to one another . . . 
What is now called the nature of woman is an eminently artificial thing— the 

50 Ibid., pp. 143-44. It >s hardly necessary to comment on the wonderful license such 
a system grants to the male to exploit other human beings. At home his "better half' 
remains virtuous and ready to replenish his vanishing humanity. It is a perfect ethic for 
a harsh business society. Home and the little wife enclosed there represent— then as now— 
the last idyll, the final pastoral. Today the suburbs serve this function and there the 
harried commercial man keeps his mate and flock of kids at pasture. 

B1 Milk op. tit., p. 441, 




H I I) 



Lii ' . 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



95 



result of forced repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation in others. 
It may be asserted without scruple, that no other class of dependents have had 
their character so entirely distorted from its natural proportions by their relation 
with their masters. 52 

Mill realized that what is commonly regarded as feminine character is but 
the predictable outcome of a highly artificial system of cultivation, or to 
adopt his own metaphor, society's female is a plant grown half in a steam 
bath and half in the snow. He foretells that the idolatrous attitude toward 
the myth of nature is bound to disintegrate before a "sound psychology." 
Deplorably, such assistance has yet to appease, but in the meantime one 
may rely on Mill's own. For its psychological contribution is the book's great 
achievement: Mill's psychology is grounded in a more lucid distinction be- 
tween prescription and description than one encounters in Freud, 53 and a 
far more intelligent grasp of the effects of environment and circumstance. 
Mill is also sensitive to the mechanisms by which conservative thought con- 
strues the status quo into the inevitable, a fine trait in a social psychologist. 
Until we undertake "an analytic study of the most important departments 
of psychology, the laws of the influence of circumstances on character"— we 
are, Mill observes, unlikely to be able to know anything about the natural 
differences of sexual personality, for "the most elementary knowledge of the 
circumstances in which they have been placed clearly points out the causes 
that have made them what they are," 6 * Meanwhile, since nothing is known 
it is presumption in man to 'lay down the law to women as to what is, or is 
not, their vocation." 65 

52 Ibid., p. 451. 

53 Freud knew and disliked Mill's essay. He had even translated it. He probably did 
not know Ruskin's lecture, but it is easy to see how much more he would have approved 
of it. Freud responded to Mill by arguing that the sexes are inherently different in 
temperament, and then, despite the logical contradiction, by deploring changes in up- 
bringing which might erode these differences. He pays chivalrous compliment to "the 
most delightful thing the world can offer us— our ideal of womanhood." He is also con- 
vinced that "nature has determined woman's destiny through beauty, charm, and sweet- 
ness." Yet he jumps from ridiculing Mill and his book ("one simply cannot find him 
human") ("he lacked in many matters, the sense of the absurd, for example in that of fe- 
male emancipation and the woman's question altogether") to a stance of personal de- 
fensiveness about his fiancee: "If for instance, I imagined my gende sweet girl as a 
competitor it would only end by my telling her, as I did seventeen months ago, that I 
am fond of her and that I implore her to withdraw from the struggle into the calm un- 
competitive activity of my home." Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, 
Vol. I (New York, Basic Books, 1953), pp. 175-76. In his letters, Freud was in the 
habit of addressing his fiancee with paternal condescension as "my precious little woman," 
"my sweet child," etc. See Ernst Freud, Letters of Sigmund Freud (New York, 1960), 
letter 76, p. 161. 

" Mill, op. tit., pp. 452-53' 
SB Ibid., p. 457. 



9 6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



II The Problem of Education 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



97 



II 1 



W-\ 



Because he understands how conditioning produces a sexual temperament 
appropriate to sexual role, Mill is in an excellent position to understand how 
woman is the product of the system which oppresses her: how all her educa- 
tion, formal and informal, is dedicated to perpetuating it. He also believes 
"the mental differences supposed to exist between women and men are but 
the natural effects of the differences in their education and circumstances, 
and indicate no radical differences, far less radical inferiority of nature." 56 
Mill's description of the education assigned to women tallies exacdy with 
Ruskin's. Yet there is one alarming difference: Ruskin finds it a very good 
thing, whereas Mill despises it as a minimal literary acquaintance with decora- 
tive Culture deliberately designed to be superficial— in Mill's derogatory 
phrase, "an education of the sentiments rather than of the understanding," 57 
calculated to render women fit for submission, vicarious experience, and a 
service ethic of largely ineffective philanthropy. 

Since he has delineated their sphere, it remains for Ruskin to "fit" women 
to it. Whereas Mill is eager to train women in every branch of arts and 
science, to open professional learning to them, that the world's available talent 
might be doubled— Ruskin would not be so precipitate: "We cannot consider 
how education may fit them for any widely extending duty until we are 
agreed what is their true constant duty." 58 Translated (it is continually neces- 
sary to translate chivalrous sentiment) this only means that women should 
not be educated in any real sense at all, least of all for the sake of education 
itself. Instead they should be indoctrinated to contribute their "modest service" 
to the male. Ruskin's formula is an education deliberately inferior by any 
standard, and Ruskin's standards are high in the case of young men. In an 
earlier lecture, he had derided short-sighted parents who aspired no further 
than adjusting their heirs to "their station in life." 58 He can rail at the prag- 
matic middle class for its unimaginative vocational interest, a low instinct for 
which he expresses an unqualified contempt, yet he feels it imperative that 
the education of women be no more ambitious than merely habituating them 
to "their place." 

Ruskin believes in the "subjection" of wives and says so. In general the task 
of the woman is to serve man and the family through "womanly guidance," 
exercise some vague and remote good influence on everyone, and dispense a 
bit of charity from time to time. It is to this end that education should pre- 
pare her. As a theory of education it is nearly an exact parallel of Rousseau's, 
save for its greater emphasis upon good works. But Ruskin also furnishes 
definitive propositions about female education; it is to be directed toward 



50 Ibid., p. 489. 

67 Ibid., p. 532. 

08 Ruskin, op. cht., p. 128. 

« Ruskin, "Of King's Treasuries," 



Sesame and Lilies, p. 46. 



making women wise, "not for self-development, but for self-renunciation." 00 
This is surely graphic enough. It is sufficient that a woman be well- 
intentioned and a model listener: "A man ought to know any language or 
science he learns, thoroughly; while a woman ought to know the same lan- 
guage or science only so far as may enable her to sympathize in her hus- 
band's pleasures, and in those of his best friends." 01 

Ruskin is solicitous to warn women away from accomplishment. They 
may get a smattering of information, but they are given orders to halt at the 
point of difficulty: "understand the meaning, the inevitableness of natural 
laws; and follow at least one of them as far as to the threshold of that bitter 
valley of humiliation, into which only the wisest and bravest of men can 
descend." 82 Theology is explicitly forbidden them, Ruskin apprehending 
that serious female interference would be fatal to patriarchal religion. Here 
a certain personal hostility lurking behind the chivalrous posture obtrudes 
itself. Ruskin irritably complains that while they generally admit they have 
no aptitude for the hard sciences, women plunge right into divinity, "that 
science in which the greatest men have trembled and the wisest erred."" 3 
A passage of invective follows, castigating those impious females who, as 
Ruskin puts it, crawl up the steps of God and attempt to divide His throne 
with Him. 64 

Much of Ruskin's educational program is eked out of the Lucy poems of 
William Wordsworth, from whence he appears to have procured a recipe for 
the "delicate strength" and the "perfect loveliness of a woman's countenance" 
which are the end products of a salutary acquaintance with sun and shower. 
Joan of Arc, he informs us blandly, was entirely educated by Nature. The 
obsession with Nature is very strong in conjunction with statements on 
women: boys must be "chiseled" into shape, but as females are "Nature," 
Ruskin is assured they grow effortlessly like flowers. Even classical libraries 
have no effect on them as blossoms do not give themselves to the contamina- 
tions of learning. Together with the graceful studies of music, art, and litera- 
ture, Nature itself constitutes the fourth branch of female education in Rus- 
kin's pedagogy. Through Nature she will grow in piety, which is well; piety 
is less dangerous than theology. Under the influence of such thoughts, the 
glowing texture of Ruskin's prose begins to melt and flow like the unctuous 
sludge of Chapel preaching. Metaphysics and astronomy should be taught to 
a female on the following plan: "She is to be taught somewhat to understand 

00 Ruskin, "Of Queen's Gardens," Sesame and Lilies, p. 145. 

61 Ibid., p. 153, 

62 Ibid., pp. 149-50. The rhetorical stress on "wisest and bravest," and the "valley nf 
humiliation" is directly at odds with the earlier statement that "a man ought to learn 
any language or science he learns thoroughly." This is any man, not the "wisest and 
bravest." 

63 Ibid., pp. 1 5 1-52. 

04 Ruskin's own unfortunate experiences with religious women, his mother and Rose 
La Touche, create strongly extenuating circumstances for the animosity here. 



98 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




the nothingness of the proportion which that little world in which she lives 
and loves, bears to the world in which God lives and loves." 65 As it is "not 
the object of education to turn the woman into a dictionary," he is persuaded 
she need not trouble much over geography and history. 60 As regards the 
latter study, Ruskin advises she confine herself simply to an appreciation of 
the romantic drama and the demonstrations of religious law afforded by the 
past. 

In Mill's opinion, the precious educational conditioning Rusldn has just 
outlined with gallant protestations of his affection, is nothing less than the 
most ingenious system of mental enslavement in history: 

All causes, social and natural, combine to make it unlikely that women should 
be collectively rebellious to the power of men. They are so far in a position 
different from all other subject classes that their masters require something far 
more from them than actual service. Men do not want solely the obedience of 
women, they want their sentiments. All men, except the most brutish, desire to 
have, in the woman most nearly connected with them, not a forced slave but 
a willing one; not a slave merely, but a favorite. They have therefore put every- 
thing in practice to enslave their minds. The masters of all other slaves rely, 
for maintaining of obedience, on fear; either fear of themselves, or religious 
fears. The masters of women wanted more than simple obedience, and they 
turned the whole force of education to effect their purpose. 67 

It is hard to believe that Mill and Ruskin are discussing the same subject— 
or, since each claims he has the best interests of women at heart— that one of 
the two does not prevaricate. Both are sincere, yet Ruskin, whose educational 
scheme is patently not the favor he proclaims it to be, is much like a paternal 
racist of the more genial variety, fairly unconscious of the real drift of his 
statements. Only occasionally does his hostility peek forth, carefully disguised 
as a moralist's wrath against frivolous "queens" who forsake their heaven of 
good works to gad about in petty snobbery or vanity. Moreover, Ruskin's 
purpose is to ennoble a system of subordination through hopeful Thetoric, 
whereas Mill's purpose is to expose it 

III The Domestic Theme 

This antithesis grows to greater proportion when the two come to discuss 
two favorite Victorian themes— The Home and the Goodness of Women. 
Ruskin's passage on the domestic scene, which he presents in the strongest 
language as the "woman's true place," is a classic of its kind. 

This is the true nature of home— it is the place of peace; the shelter, not only 
from all injury, but from all terror, doubt, and division. In so far as it is not 



85 "Of Queen's Gardens," p. 

Ba lbid. t p. 150. 

87 Mill, op. cit.j pp. 443-44. 



151. 



m 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



99 



this, it is not home; so far as the anxieties of the outer life penetrate into it, 
and the inconsistently-minded, unknown, unloved, or hostile society of the 
outer world is allowed by either husband or wife to cross the threshold it 
ceases to be a home; it is then only a part of the outer world which you have 
roofed over and lighted fire in. But so far as it is a sacred place, a vestal 
temple, a temple of the hearth watched over by household gods, before whose 
faces none may come but those whom they can receive with love— so far as it 
is this, and the roof and the fire are types only of a nobler shade and light, 
shade as of the rock in a weary land, and the light as of Pharos in the stormy 
sea— so far it vindicates the name and fulfills the praise of home. 

And wherever a true wife comes, this home is always round her. The stars 
only may be over her head, the glow-worm in the night-cold grass may be the 
only fire at her foot, but home is wherever she is; and for a noble woman it 
stretches far round her, better than ceiled with cedar or painted with vermillion, 
shedding its quiet light far for those who else were homeless. 68 

Mill sees it differently. The home is the center of a system he defines as 
"domestic slavery." Since she lives under the first as well as the last, or 
longest, rule of force in the history of tyranny, Mill calmly declares that 
woman is no more than a bondservant within marriage. He then summa- 
rizes the history of this institution as based on sale or enforcement; the hus- 
band holding the power of life or death over his wife. He has some impressive 
legal-historical evidence: although a husband might divorce his wife, she 
could not escape him; English law defined the murder of a husband as petty 
treason (as distinguished from high treason) because a husband stood to a 
wife in the relation of a sovereign; the penalty was death by burning. 69 Most 
slaves, Mill argues, had greater rights than wives under the law: the Ro- 
mans reserved their pecuniam to them and some leisure was always per- 
mitted them. Even female slaves were sometimes spared coercion into sexual 
intimacy with their masters. Yet no wife is exempt from sexual assault, how- 
ever much both partners might despise each other. 70 Under the law, as Mill 
points out, a man owns wife and child entirely. Should his wife leave him, 
she is entitled to take nothing with her, and her husband may, if he wishes 
to exercise his legal rights, compel her to return. Divorce, Mill urges with 
ironic force, would seem the least concession in a system where "a woman 
is denied any lot in life but that of being the personal body-servant of a 
despot." 71 

While admitting that he has "described the wife's legal position, not her 
actual treatment," 72 Mill argues that law is not custom, but permission. No 

68 Ruskin, "Of Queen's Gardens," pp. 144-45. 
68 Mill, op. cit., p. 46r. 

70 The theme of enforced sexual relations within marriage figures rather prominently 
in Victorian literature, notably in Browning's The Ring and The Book. 

71 Mill, op. cit,, p. 464. 

72 Ibid., p. 465. 



ioo SEXUAL POLITICS 

tyranny exerts its possibilities without mitigation: "Every absolute king does 
not sit at his window to enjoy the groans of his tortured subjects." 73 But 
they are within his reach in every legal sense, should he crave them. "What- 
ever gratifications of pride there is in the possession of power, and whatever 
personal interest in its exercise, is in this case not confined to a limited class, 
but common to the whole male sex." 7 * As Mill remonstrates, one deals here 
with absolute power, for the law allows it, and while probably not resorted 
to as frequently as once, it is still there for the wise and the foolish, the loving 
and the hating. Fortunately marriages, and the people who make them, are 
far better than the law, but every danger yet remains inherent in such law, 
and one of the main objects of Mill's essay is to argue in the strongest terms 
for changes in the legal status of women. 

In both Roman and American slavery, Mill reminds one, affection was by 
no means uncommon. But it is as perniciously naive to judge "domestic 
slavery" by its best instances, the loving rule and loving submission which 
Ruskin dwells on, as it is foolish to neglect its worst occasions. And of those 
worst occasions, Mill is too acute a student of nineteenth-century life to be 
ignorant. 76 Even Ruskin shows he has heard of them in a reference of taste- 
less levity to "Bill and Nancy," whom he deliberately misrepresents as 
sparring partners, "down in that back street . . . knocking each other's teeth 
out." 70 The allusion is of course to Bill Sykes and the woman he clubbed to 
death in Dickens' Oliver Twist. 71 Such instances of brutality, ranging from 
blows to murder, were very common occurrences in the period, and though 
Ruskin tosses them off with a loutish attempt at class humor, Mill is far too 
humane either to try to find them funny, or, as in Ruskin's Punch-and-Judy 
show version, to misrepresent the facts. 

Mill is perfecdy aware that among the poor the female is subject to greater 
indignities than anywhere else, as she is the only creature in the world over 
whom an exploited man can claim superiority and "prove" it by crude force. 

And how many thousands are there among the lowest classes in every country, 
who, without being in a legal sense malefactors in every other respect, because 
in every other quarter their aggressions meet with resistance, indulge the ut- 
most habitual excesses of bodily violence toward the unhappy wife, who 

73 Ibid., p. 466. 
t* Ibid., p. 438. 

75 The Criminal Procedures Act of 1853 attempted, with disastrous effect, to abridge 
somewhat an Englishman's "right" to beat his wife. Resentment at such a suggestion 
appears to have but increased the practice. See W. L. Burns, The Age of Equipose 
(London, 1964I). 

76 Ruskin, "Of King's Treasuries," Sesame and Lilies, p. 46. 

77 The description of Nancy's hideous death is one of the most dynamic in Dickens' 
¦work and likely to be the most appalling in the period. Dickens had a sick fascination 
for the episode, hastening his own death by dramatizing hers at public readings, counting 
the evening a success only if a great many women fainted. See Edmund Wilson's historic 
essay, "Dickens, The Two Scrooges," in The Wound and The Bow (Oxford, 1965). 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



JOI 



>'l'|r 



alone, at least of grown persons, can neither repel nor escape from their bru- 
tality; and toward whom the excess of dependence inspires their mean and 
savage natures, not with generous forbearance and a point of honor to behave 
well to one whose lot in life is trusted entirely to their kindness, but on the 
contrary with a notion that the law has delivered her to them as their thing, 
to be used at their pleasure, and that they are not expected to practice the con- 
sideration towards her which is required from them towards everybody else. 78 

In the nineteenth century, as today, unreported, even unremarked upon, 
assault among women too servile or too intimidated to risk further attacks was 
a customary event among the lower classes. Mill urges that as "there can be 
little check to brutality consistent with leaving the victim still in the power of 
the executioner," divorce should be permitted upon conviction of assault, lest 
convictions become unobtainable "for want of a prosecutor, or for want of a 
witness." 70 Further down the rungs of connubial sensibility: "the vilest 
malefactor has some wretched woman tied to him, against whom he can 
commit any atrocity except killing her, and if tolerably cautious, can do that 
without much danger of the legal penalty." 80 Such occasions were a favorite 
Victorian theme, particularly in the melodrama. The treatment afforded 
such subject matter, then as now, is often a curiously hypocritical mixture 
of prurient delight and moral compunction. 

Since the conditions of any institution are so liable to abuse and Mill's 
contentions are grounded in legal reality, Ruskin's domestic idyll is some- 
what more difficult to infer from the facts than Mill's description. Ruskin will 
trust to chivalry. Mill regards it as an evolutionary stage, only a slight im- 
provement over the barbarities which preceded it and hardly a reliable de- 
terrent, depending as it does upon the gratuitous good will of an elite. 
Mill had consulted social history and law; Ruskin trusted to poetry, and his 
history of women is based on the gossamer of literary idealization. Out of the 
political wisdom afforded by the portraits of Shakespearian heroines, "perfect 
women," "steadfast in grave hope and errorless purpose," "strong always to 
sanctify, infallibly faithful"— together with the tender beauties of Walter 
Scott's romances— "patient," full of "untiring self-sacrifice" and "deeply re- 
strained affection," Ruskin attempts to re-create the sexual history of the West- 
ern peoples. 81 As further evidence, he introduces the posture of the courtly 
lover encountered in Dante and the troubadours, sworn to serve and obey a 
mistress. Then, with impressive bravura, Ruskin declares that ancient Greek 
"knights" also practiced courtly love, boasting he could quote antique originals 
to this effect, were it not that his audience might have difficulty in following 
him. In any case, he will not be so mean with his hearers as to deny them 
some descriptions of the "simple mother and wife's heart of Andromache," the 

™ Mill, op. cit., pp. 467-68. 

™Ibid., p. 468. 

*o Ibid., p. 467. 

81 Ruskin, "Of Queen's Gardens," pp. 133, 134, 135. 



' 



Mi 



1 02 SEXUAL POLITICS 

housewifely calm of Penelope, the "bowing down of Iphegenia, lamb-like and 
silent," and Alcestis' self-immolation to save her husband's life. 82 Ruskin 
rejoices in this piece of "self-sacrifice" presenting it as evidence that the Greek 
mind had a premonition of the Christian doctrine of Resurrection, The en- 
tire "historical" passage in the lecture, lengthy and presumably central to its 
argument, is hard to account for. Ruskin was not an ignorant man. 

It seems at times that historical misrepresentation can never appear too 
egregious when its subject is woman. Certain of his contentions, Ruskin calls 
upon his stout middle-class audience to doubt the validity of his assertions. 
He appears convinced, and is sure they will be as well, that the poetry to 
which he has alluded is no less than a true and accurate picture of the con- 
dition of women in the societies in which these literary productions origi- 
nated, since it is inconceivable that great authors "in the main works of their 
lives, are amusing themselves with a fictitious and ideal view of the relation 
between man and woman." Nor can this be mere empty abstraction, but must 
be fact, for Ruskin declares it is "worse than fictitious or idle— for a thing to 
be imaginary, yet desirable, if it were possible." 83 

While insisting that "in all Christian ages which have been remarkable 
for their purity of progress, there has been absolute yielding of obedient de- 
votion, by the lover to his mistress," 84 Ruskin neady reassures the nervous 
suspicion mounting among the burghers who hear him that while this may 
be all very well for courtship, it is not appropriate for marriage where he 
agrees that the proper thing is a "true wifely subjection." 85 What follows is 
that tidy duplicity in social policy which Ruskin codified in the dogma of 
separate spheres: the wife shall be subject but will "guide," even "rule" her 
lord by serving as his conscience. This pretends to forfeit status through se- 
mantics. Yet no forfeiture is involved. Maintaining the most traditional roles, 
Ruskin prudendy reserves the world for the male, leaving the female an 
ancillary circle of housewifely and philanthropic activity. Moreover, the 
capricious gallantry of his enunciations about the "respect" due to "virtuous 
women" would suggest that status— dignity and equality in human affairs- 
were not the issue at all. And at its most fulsome it would even insinuate 
that because of the gratitude of her "lord" (as Ruskin refers to that person- 
age) the female actually enjoys a higher status than the male, By transposing 
political position to moral rectitude, we are given to imagine that women are 
"better" than men. Unless, of course, they are worse— then God help them. 

What Mill has to say on the subject is directly at odds with all this. While 
in the lower classes the ethic of male supremacy may take the form of bru- 
tality, in the middle classes it tends toward the rankest hypocrisy; among the 
educated "the inequality is kept as much as possible out of sight; above all out 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



103 



82 Ibid., pp. 137, 
8S Ibid., p. 1 39. 

84 Ibid., p. 140. 

85 Ibid., p. 142. 



138. 



of sight of the children," with "the compensations of the chivalrous feeling 
being made prominent, while the servitude which requires them is kept 
in the background." 86 But the facts of the situation intrude themselves 
quickly enough on the minds of young men, however they are raised. If their 
education is chivalrous they are only being preserved from an actuality they 
soon enough discover. Mill was raised by a domestic tyrant who encouraged 
his children to despise their mother. Ruskin's childhood was very different 
and he undoubtedly acquired a becoming politeness of attitude. Mill was 
spared the pretension of chivalry; Ruskin appears to have known it so long 
he became unable to recognize it for what it was until he no longer wished 
to do so. Mill's observations are an interesting glimpse into boyhood: 

. . . people are little aware . . . how early the notion of his inherent superi- 
ority to a girl arises in his mind; how it grows with his growth and strengthens 
with his strength; how it is inoculated by one schoolboy upon another; how 
early the youth thinks himself superior to his mother, owing her perhaps for- 
bearance, but no real respect; and how sublime and sultan-like a sense of su- 
periority he feels, above all, over the woman whom he honours by admitting 
her to a partnership of his life. Is it imagined that all this does not pervert 
the whole manner of existence of the man, both as an individual and as a 
social being . . . Above all, when the feeling of being raised above the whole 
of the other sex is combined with personal authority over one individual among 
them; the situation, if a school of conscientious and affectionate forbearance 
to those whose strongest points of character are conscience and affection, is to 
men of another quality, a regularly constituted Academy or Gymnasium for 
training them in arrogance and overbearingness . . , 87 

The effect of male ascendency upon human society in general and the 
masculine character (which governs society) in particular is such that it 
fosters notions of superiority and satisfaction over differential or prejudicial 
treatment from earliest youth. In Mill's analysis, the system of sexual domi- 
nance is the very prototype of other abuses of power and other forms of 
egotism. Just as Engels came to see in sexual super- and subordination the 
model for later hierarchies of rank, class, and wealth, Mill had discovered in 
it the psychological foundations of other species of oppression. "All the selfish 
propensities, the self-worship, the unjust self-preference, which exist among 
mankind, have their source and root in, and derive their principal nourish- 
ment from, the present constitution of the relation of men and women." 88 

Chivalry and all— marriage is really feudal, and Mill hates feudalism. At 
present little more than a "school of despotism in which the virtues of des- 

86 Mill, op. cit., p. 523. 

87 Ibid., pp. 523-24. One is reminded oE Jefferson's eloquent demonstration of how 
slavery corrupted white youth even from their childhood. 

88 Ibid., p. 522. 



EX H 



104 



SEXIML POLITICS 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



ids 



Jtiii 



potism, but also its vices, are largely nourished" 89 the family can afford no 
real love to its members until it is based on a situation of total equality 
among them. His position of authority is less likely to inspire the husband to 
affection than to "an intense feeling of the dignity and importance of his 
own personality; making him disdain a yoke for himself . . . he is abundantly 
ready to impose on others for his own interest and glorification." 90 With an 
admirable touch of candor, Mill admits that no man would wish for himself 
the conditions of life he chivalrously consigns to women: the pastoral coign 
of a Queen's Garden would appall any man confined to it— perhaps Ruskin 
most of all. 

The single concession Ruskin's sphere theory makes to its rule that male 
"duties," meaning privileges, are "public" (war, money, politics, and learning) 
whereas female "duties," meaning responsibilities, are "private," e.g., domestic 
—is in the realm of philanthropy. 91 In pursuit of its kind offices, Ruskin is 
inclined to permit woman a narrow latitude to step beyond her sphere, never 
into the great world of nineteenth-century reform, but into the little world of 
the homes of what were then known as the "honest poor." There, while sew- 
ing garments and exchanging recipes, the respectable wife might make some 
minuscule restitution for the ravages her masculine class-counterpart had 
been busy accomplishing all day through his worldly prerogatives of politics, 
money, and technology. 

Ruskin, who had thought of a scheme whereby English boys might be 
"knighted" and English girls "invested" with the official title of "lady" under 
the auspices of a national chivalry movement something like the boy scouts, 
has a kindred inspiration for the adult middle class. 02 The word "Lady," he 
tells them, means "bread-giver"; or "loaf-giver"; "Lord" means "maintainer of 
laws." 93 Role should be determined accordingly: under the euphemism of 
"maintainer of laws" the male appropriates all power, and the female dis- 
penses charity. In its ersatz-medieval character, the whole thing is not only 
depressingly fantastical, it is singularly inappropriate to the conditions of 
nineteenth-century industrialism whose nearly infinite economic injustices 
Ruskin felt so keenly. These could scarcely be ameliorated by the trifling 
charities of a middle-class housewife posing as some outlandish medieval 
almsgiver. 

Ruskin's typically Victorian insistence that social responsibility is a female 
province is somewhat ridiculous in the light of two considerations: first, as dis- 
possessed persons themselves, both legally and economically, women were 
quite unable to give any really material help to other dispossessed groups; 
secondly, the device enabled men, and especially men of the ruling class, to 

88 Ibid., p. 479. 

00 Ibid., pp. 479-80. 

« Ruskin, "Of Queen's Gardens," p. 164. 

wibid., p. 166. 

03 Ibid., pp. 166-67. 



ignore or deputize their own enormous responsibilities to the poor whom they 
oppressed— since, rather than terminate such oppression they preferred to al- 
leviate it with charitable solace. 94 Like most Victorians Ruskin believed 
women to have finer instincts, for men are "feeble in sympathy," and can 
even "bear the sight of misery" and "tread it down" "in their own struggle." 85 
Mill answers this cherished sentimentality with a certain ironic logic: 

They are declared to be better than men; an empty compliment which must 
provoke a bitter smile from every woman of spirit, since there is no other 
situation in life in which it is the established order, and considered quite 
natural and suitable, that the better should obey the worse. If this piece of 
talk is good for anything, it is only as an admission by men, of the corrupting 
influence of power ... it is true that servitude, except when it actually bru- 
talizes, though corrupting to both, is less so to the slaves than to the slave- 
masters. 96 

The philanthropy which Ruskin advocates for women as their sole oppor- 
tunity outside the Home, is to Mill's better understanding of social economy 
merely an "unenlightened and short-sighted benevolence" which is pernicious 
to those it pretends to serve by sapping "the foundations of the self respect" 
which is the only pride left the independent poor and their only route of 
escape. 97 The paternalism of the charity and gratitude system is humiliating 
to the poor— far more so than Ruskin would permit his queens to realize. 98 
Mill would remind them: 

A woman born to the present lot of women, and content with it, how should 
she appreciate the value of self-dependence? She is not self-dependent; her des- 
tiny is to receive everything from others, and why should what is good enough 
for her be bad for the poor? Her familiar notions of good are of blessings 
descending from a superior. She forgets that she is not free, and that the poor 
are . . ." 

94 Ruskin seems to toady to the genteel pretensions of his audience, urging them to 
pointless and impractical feudal largesse in statements like this: "Your fancy is pleased 
with the thought of being noble ladies, with a train of vassals. Be it so; you cannot be 
too noble and your train too great; but see to it that your train is of vassals whom you 
serve and feed." Ibid., pp. 167-68. 

»B Ibid., p. 169. 

86 Mill, op. cit., p. 518. 

07 Ibid., p, 532. 

88 Welfare is a contemporary example of the system as it corrodes generation after 
generation of the poor, presupposing a benevolent master and grateful serf mentality, 
leaving its victims on the short rations of charity and cultivating an enervating dependence 
which only further dependence can satisfy. This is, of course, not really welfare, but 
neo-feudalism. 

8B Mill, op. cit., p. 533. 



io6 SEXUAL POLITICS 

Considerably beyond chivalrous compliment, Mill is perfectly aware of how 
adverse an effect feminine influence can have: "He who has a wife has given 
hostages to Mrs. Grundy." 100 Herself the victim of a narrow and superficial 
education, woman is often just as likely to exert an influence that is petty, 
family-centered, and selfish. 

As to the feminine self-sacrifice which so inspires Ruskin, it is in Mill's 
eyes only a despicable self-immolation, both wasteful and tasteless. Because 
it is not reciprocal, the "exaggerated self-abnegation which is the present 
artificial ideal of feminine character," 101 produces only a false altruism. 
Loolcing beneath the surface of chivalrous blandishment, Mill has detected 
expediency, even duplicity; 

... we are perpetually told that women are better than men by those who 
are totally opposed to treating them as if they were as good; so that the saying 
has passed into a piece of tiresome cant, intended to put a complimentary face 
upon an injury, and resembling those celebrations of royal clemency which, 
according to Gulliver, the King of Lilliput always prefixed to his most san- 
guinary decrees. 102 

On the other hand, if we accept the report of Ruskin's vision, the grief of 
the world is on the heads of women, so powerful are they in their secluded 
bowers, those shadowy comers of "higher mystery" at whose behests mascu- 
line power "bows itself and will forever bow, before the myrtle crown and 
the stainless sceptre of womanhood." 103 Carried aloft by his chimera of 
woman's power, he insists, "there is not a war in the world, no, nor an in- 
justice, but you women are answerable for it; not in that you have provoked, 
but in that you have not hindered." 104 There is a certain humor in Ruskin's 
proclamation that woman, confined through history to a vicarious and indi- 
rect existence, without a deciding voice in any event, with so much of the 
burden of military, economic and technological events visited upon her, and 
so little of their glories, is nevertheless solely accountable for morality on 
the planet, 

Ruskin then launches into a peroration on flowers, whose subject, though 
he can never bring himself to say so in English, is prostitution, the cancer 
in chivalry's rose. He begins prosaically enough: "the path of a good woman 
is indeed strewn with flowers, but they rise behind her steps, not before 
them." 108 He then takes off in ecstasy, and orders the good women of Eng- 
land, presumably the matrons snugly seated before him in Manchester's 
Town Hall to go out into the "darkness of the terrible streets" on a mission 

100 Ibid., p. 535. 

101 Ibid., p. 476. 

102 Ibid. 

losRusldn, "Of Queen's Gardens," p. 168. 

104 !{,«*., p . l6 p. 

105 ibid., p. 172. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



107 



to rescue certain persons there whom he refers to in cipher as "feeble florets," 
full period euphuism for whore. 100 Ruskin's plan is that the matrons will 
plant and establish the harlots in "little fragrant beds." Perhaps more in line 
with his general intentions, is the injunction to "fence them, in their trem- 
bling from the fierce wind." 107 

However buried in flowers, the overtones of sexuality in the last passage 
provoke still others: Ruskin quotes from Tennyson's vaguely erotic lyric 
"Come into the garden Maude" and transforms the unbalanced young 
man who is actually the speaker in the poem into a slightly eroticized Christ, 
and one with whom the lecturer appears to identify in the most curious, 
oblique, and oddly personal manner. Having now run off into a rather self- 
indulgent type of piety Ruskin concludes the lecture in a paroxysm of Dis- 
senting fervor: 

Oh you queens, you queens! among the hills and happy greenwood of this 
land of yours, shall the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; 
and in your cities shall the stones cry out against you, that they are the only 
pillows where the Son of Man can lay his head? 108 

It would almost seem that Ruskin's mind has grown confused and that he 
is addressing his cold and obdurate child mistress in the language of Bethel 
chapel. That salvation of the world he is assured should come from its subject 
women is a concoction of nostalgic mirage, regressive, infantile, or narcissistic 
sexuality, religious ambition, and simplistic social panacea. It is the very 
stuff of the age's pet sentimental vapors, enshrined in notions such as "the 
angel in the house," "the good woman who rescues the fallen," etc. It is the 
fabric of dreams. But the dreams of an age are part of its life, although per- 
haps as often a foretaste of its death. 

By comparison, Mill's conclusion seems not only more rational but full of 
a new and promising vigor. He urges the complete emancipation of women 
not only for the sake of the "unspeakable gain in happiness to the liberated 
half of the species, the difference to them between a life of subjection to the 
will of others and a life of rational freedom," 100 but also for the enormous 
benefit this would confer on both sexes, on humanity: 'We have had the 
morality of submission and the morality of chivalry and generosity; the time 
is now come" 110 for "the most fundamental of the social relations" to be 

ioe ibid., p. 173. 

107 Ibid. An alliance between whores and ladies, however unlikely, might be the end 
of chivalry which relies, as Mill is careful to point out, on the double standard foe its 
chief value, "virtuous womanhood." Though undoubtedly sincere, Ruskin can scarcely 
be taken literally here, so little does he appear to apprehend the consequences of his sug- 
gestion. 

ia »Ibid., p. 175. 

M>»MilI, op. eit., p. 522. 

u ° Ibid., p. 478. 



I* U 



io8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



"placed under the rule of equal justice." 111 In Mill's tones one hears the 
precursor of revolution; in Ruskin's only reaction tactfully phrased. In the 
1860s Ruskin's muddled gallantry was in every mouth, but by 1920 Mill's 
clear voice had prevailed. 

Engels and Revolutionary Theory 

I The Histortcal Paradigm 

Nearly as important as the political breakthrough, that actual change in the 
quality of their lives which a gradual, painful, and finally partial or condi- 
tional emancipation realized for women in the sexual revolution, was the work 
of the revolutionary theorists who passed beyond agitation to provide an 
analysis of the past and a new model for the future. Such theorists could give 
coherence and ideological support to the disputes of the day, otherwise the 
product of resentment or prejudice. Capable of seeing the events of the pres- 
ent in a historical perspective, they could provide direction for change other- 
wise the product of unconscious forces. The major theorists were Chernyshev- 
sky, Mill, Engels, Bebel, and Veblen. Much of what they said is still relevant 
to a sexual revolution and therefore still speaks to us today. 112 

Of all these theoretical writings, Engels' The Origin of the Family, Private 
Property, and the State 113 provided the most comprehensive account of patri- 
archal history and economy— and the most radical, for Engels alone among 
the theorists attacked the problem of patriarchal family organization. But in 
tracing it back to its original roots he was baffled by one of history's 
conundrums. 

Here one must pause to consider a curious quarrel that has absorbed an- 
thropology for some hundred years. 114 One school, which for simplicity shall 
be called the school of patriarchal origins, takes the patriarchal family to 
be the primordial form of human social organization, tribe, nation, etc., 
evolving from it or patterned upon it. 115 Generally, the effect of this argu- 
ment is to see in patriarchy the primeval, original, hence the "natural" form 
of society, biologically based in the physical strength of the male, and the 

111 Ibid., p. 54 r. 

112 See N. G. Chernyshevslcy's What Is to Be Done?, August Bebel's Women and 
Socialism, and Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class. Charlotte Perkins 
Gilman and Elizabeth Cady Stanton provided the Woman's Movement with argument 
and ideology as well. 

113 Friedrich Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884) 
(Chicago, Charles Kerr, 1902). Translated from the German by Ernest Untennann. 

114 The battle rages elsewhere than in America, where the social sciences appear 
serenely adjusted to a settled patriarchal view. 

116 The chief contributions were made by Sir Henry Maine (.Ancient Law, 1861) 
and Edward Westermarck (The History of Human Marriage, 1891). The first is an 
account of patriarchal origins through patriarchal law, the second is based on the premise 
that patriarchal monogamy is a primeval human institution. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



109 



11 



"debilitating" effects of pregnancy in the female, working in conjunction 
with the environmental needs of a hunting culture, 116 to explain the sub- 
ordination of women as the reasonable, even the necessary outcome of cir- 
cumstances. There are several weaknesses in this theory making its hypotheses 
insufficient to constitute necessary cause: social and political institutions are 
rarely based on physical strength, but are generally upheld by value systems 
in co-operation with other forms of social and technical force; hunting culture 
was generally succeeded by agricultural society which brought different en- 
vironmental circumstances and needs; pregnancy and childbirth may be so- 
cially construed or socially arranged so that they are very far from debilitating 
events or the cause of physical inferiority, particularly where child care is 
communal and fertility reverenced or desired. And finally, since patriarchy 
is a social and political form, it is well here, as with other human institutions, 
to look outside nature for its origins. 

Probably one ought to be content with questioning the primordial char- 
acter of patriarchal origins, relying upon the argument that since what we are 
dealing with is an institution, patriarchy must, like other human institutions, 
have had an origin and arisen out of circumstances which can be inferred or 
reconstructed, and since, if this is so, some other social condition must have 
obtained previous to patriarchy. Members of the matriarchal school, however, 
were not content with this. Working at a disadvantage because trying to 
counteract an established theory and strong social prejudices, they found it 
necessary to posit prepatriarchal conditions in the positive sense of "matri- 
archy." 117 While only two members of this school went so far as to imagine 
matriarchy a complete or exact analogue of patriarchy (e.g., a social form 
where the female was as dominant, the male as oppressed, as the male had 
been dominant and the female oppressed in patriarchy), 118 nearly every 
member has argued that patriarchal rule was preceded by some form of ma- 
triarchal rule, where mother-right, the "female principle," or fertility domi- 
nated social and religious life. They found considerable evidence for the last 
two items in myth and the early history of religions, as well as in the tendency 
of agricultural peoples to worship the fertility principle. The discovery of 
the existence of matrilineality among certain non-Western peoples was con- 
strued as a vestige of matriarchy persisting within groups who were in transi- 
tion between matriarchy and patriarchy. 

Despite the possible fascination of the dispute, and its logical attraction 

118 War is frequently urged as another factor. As organized armed conflict, war is 
too evidently an institution itself to qualify as primeval. 

nT Here the chief contributions were made by Bachofen (Das Mittterrecht, i860, 
Louis Henry Morgan (Ancient Society, 1877), Robert Briffault (The Mothers, 1927), 
McLennon (Primitive Marriage, 1875) and Giraud-Teulon (Les Origmes de la Famille, 
1874). See also the works of Sir James Frazer and Joseph Campbell, Robert Graves 
(The White Goddess"), and Jane Harrison (Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 
1903). 

us See Mathias and Marhilde Vaertung, The Dominant Sex (London, 1923). 



no SEXUAL POLITICS 

as an etiological problem in sexual politics, it appears to be incapable of 
resolution since the information from prehistory which might settle it is 
inaccessible. 119 Given that each school works only upon hypothesis, it is 
more interesting, and perhaps even more pertinent, to understand the sexual- 
political predilections of each faction. Of course, both sides agree that the 
present and historical form is patriarchy— what they disagree about is not 
only prehistory, but also, by implication (as we shall see) the future as well. 
In general, the most vociferous members of the patriarchal school of origins 
tend toward conservatism and are often led by the effect of their argument to 
ratify patriarchy as in some sense the "natural" and original form of human 
society, from which departure (whether or not it may be recommended) is 
variation— and deliberate variation. There is a fairly strong implication that 
any such modification is a concession to modem civilization or "changed 
social values," possibly dangerous if radical (e.g., affecting the patriarchal 
family structure or drastically altering its role system) and probably revocable 
in any case should need arise, or "nature" reassert itself. 120 Members of 
the matriarchal school are somewhat less complacent as they neither serve 
a status quo nor contemplate a return to earlier forms. The main force of 
their argument is to challenge patriarchy's claims to eternal authority, pri- 
meval or primordial origins, and biological or environmental necessity. They 
see patriarchy as but one era of human history and therefore, theoretically, 
as capable of dissolution as it was of institution. 

A liberal, Mill saw no further back in time than a universal rule of force 
and took the subjection of women to be an eternal feature of human life 
which "progress" and moral suasion might alleviate as he felt they had tyranny 
and slavery. A communist, Engels was temperamentally disinclined to accept 
the optimism of this view of a continuously progressive history; he believed he 
saw in the institution of slavery, for example, a backward step from a more 
genial primitive communal life. A revolutionary, he was necessarily at odds 
with fatalistic or "biological" versions of the origins of human institutions 
(such as those of the patriarchal school), preferring instead to regard insti- 
tutions as man-made and hence capable of radical, sudden, even violent al- 
teration, should a conscious revolutionary humanity so desire. Having seen 
the connection between the patriarchal family and property, Engels believed 
he had found the origins of property in the subjection and ownership of 
women upon which patriarchy was founded. Engels was understandably 
attracted to the work of Bachofen, whose Das Mutterrecht was the first 
formulation of the matriarchal theory of origins. For the matriarchate ap- 

119 As the historical period opens patriarchy has already appeared. Of the social or- 
ganization in prehistory there is simply insufficient evidence to judge, and the social 
organization of contemporary preliterate peoples does not provide a reliable guide to the 
social conditions of prehistorical peoples. 

1-0 Hence their satisfaction over the failure or relinquishment of experimental arrange- 
ments in the kibbutzim, Communist China and Russia, etc. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



nr 



I r!| 



peared to Engels to be a primordial communism, without property in persons, 
without familial property interests, that very simplicity which socialism has 
often sought in the past, partly out of its need for an example of a world 
without a complex inequitable political order based on wealth, and partly 
out of its own nostalgia for a golden age. 121 Whatever the character of 
"matriarchy" (and here Engels' entire anthropological basis is more than 
problematic by now) 122 it could be demonstrated that patriarchy was accom- 
panied by all the ills Engels deplored, the ownership of persons, beginning 
with women and progressing to other forms of slavery, the institutions of 
class, caste, rank, ruling and propertied classes, the steady development of 
an unequally distributed wealth— and finally the state. 

Combining Bachofen with Louis Morgan's pioneering work in anthropol- 
ogy and his own socialist theory, Engels could construct a universal history; 
one which took account of the family and conditions of human reproduction 
and social organization as gens, phTatry and tribe evolved into city and nation, 
as well as one which recorded the means of material production as humanity 
evolved into roolmaker, herdsman, farmer, artisan, merchant, and finally 
manufacturer and industrialist. Engels constructed a series of stages in so- 
cial or family history, passing by degrees from matriarchy (mother-right) 
through a succession of sexual associations: promiscuity, group marriage, the 
consanguineous family, the Punalua, and ending in patriarchy through pair- 
ing and finally monogamous marriage. 

II A Digression on the Evidence ov Myth 

Despite the comprehensive and neatly explicit character of this scheme 
there is one crucial event which Engels and his sources fail to account for 
adequately— the patriarchal takeover. Whatever form of social organization 
preceded it, the genesis of patriarchy is still a moot and perhaps even a cru- 
cial question in human history. Both Engels and Bachofen presumed patri- 
archy to have arisen in conjunction with a change from a more communal 
sexual life to the adoption of certain forms of sexual association, first through 
pairing and finally through monogamy, both of which established the male's 
exclusive sexual possession of the female. 123 The existence of pairing mar- 
riages has considerable support, strict monogamy being by no means a com- 
mon form and probably late in developing. The existence of the other forms 
mentioned: promiscuity, group marriage, etc., has been heatedly debated and 
appears dubious. According to the very unsatisfactory evidence available, 
Bachofen and Engels' supposition that patriarchy originated solely or largely 

121 Perhaps there was a need to counteract the idyll of "patriarchal simplicity" as 
well. 

122 For the most recent discussion of Morgan and Bachofen see Marvin Harris, The 
Origins of Anthropological Theory (New York, Columbia, i960). 

123 Within pairing marriage (as Engels defines it) the male is free for otter attach- 
ments; the female is not It could be absolved by divorce. 



*JJ 



112 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



through the adoption of certain forms of sexual associations, is probably un- 
tenable, other changes— social, ideological, technological, and economic— pre- 
senting themselves as more likely. Engels' contention that women constituted 
the first property is probably true. However, his belief that women are made 
chattels through the establishment of the male's exclusive sexual possession 
over woman in marriage (a possession not reciprocal for women) already 
presupposes patriarchal circumstances. 

Realizing the importance of the cause for this shift or change in the 
character of sexual association, realizing too the important role of early 
religion in connection with sexuality, Bachofen looked to myth and literature 
for evidence of how early society construed biological event in terms one 
might call sexual-political. One factor undeniably inherent in the situation, 
but certainly difficult to place in historical order, is the discovery of pater- 
nity. 124 Bachofen, who heard in ancient myth a thousand echoes both of 
the ancient matriarchate and of a patriarchal dispossession of its deities and 
values, had pointed out the usefulness of fables, such as the one Aeschylus 
employed in the Oresteia, for pinpointing a moment when knowledge of 
paternity Can undoubtedly much earlier discovery) came to be used to support 
patriarchal rule. Conservative factors such as religious myth and kinship ties 
are, in the absence of more concrete evidence, the most lasting vestiges of 
that vast historical shift whereby patriarchy, probably by slow degrees and 
stages, and most likely at different moments in each locale, replaced whatever 
order preceded it and instituted that long government of male over female. 

The eldest and most religiously conservative of the Greek tragedians, 
Aeschylus, made use of the last play in his Oresteian trilogy, The Furies 
(Jiumenides) to present a confrontation drama between patriarchal or pa- 
ternal authority and what appear to be the defeated claims of an earlier order, 
one which had placed emphasis upon maternal claims and was in Bachofen's 
view matriarchal. Working on the material of much earlier myth, the play- 
wright has sharpened the Olympian decision between the claims of Clytem- 
nestra and the Furies as against those of Agamemnon and Orestes to become 
something of an ideological conflict. 125 

One must go back before the scene of the play and recall the chain of 
events out of which its action arises. Clytemnestra had killed Agamemnon 
upon his return from Troy. A victorious general, coming home in triumph 
with a booty of captive women, among them the Trojan princess Cassandra, 
now maddened by rape and enslavement— Agamemnon's assassination is a 
blow against all patriarchal authority; Clytemnestra's act constitutes the most 
outrageous rebellion against the masculine authority of husband and king. 

124 Even Maine took account of this, realizing that certainty of paternity was highly 
important to the patriarchal family and patriarchal authority. Somehow it did not occur 
to him that his insight was very much at odds with his insistence on the primordial char- 
acter of patriarchy itself. 

123 One wonders at the linguistic accident of her name. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



»i3 



In further treason to marital and political lordship, she has taken a lover 
during Agamemnon's ten-year absence, and now aspires to share the throne 
with him. Above all, Clytemnestra seems to be defending the claims of 
mother-right in seeking to avenge her daughter Iphigenia, whom Agamem- 
non had enticed from her by promising that she was to marry Achilles, the 
pride of his army. Upon the girl's arrival in his camp at Aulis, her father 
slaughtered the "bride," a human sacrifice to propitiate the winds that car- 
ried him to Troy and glory. 

Deeply offended at his mother's offense against primogeniture and mascu- 
line prerogative, Orestes then revenged his father's death. But in committing 
matricide, he has provoked the rage of the Furies, who pursue him from city 
to city. In The Flies, Sartre passed off these dark avengers as guilt, remorse, 
or the force of public opinion. But in Aeschylus they appear as the deposed 
powers of a matriarchate, reduced already to the level of harridans. And their 
cry that Orestes' crime must be punished (Clytemnestra already having paid 
for hers with her life) has something of the sound of matriarchy's last stand 
in the ancient world. 

When the Furies accuse him of matricide, Orestes dodges responsibility; 
he acted under orders from the Oracle of Apollo. The Furies refuse to believe 
"a god of prophecy" would recommend such a crime, so they put the prince 
on trial, assured that justice will be on their side. They have failed to reckon 
with patriarchal justice. When Orestes observes that they should have hounded 
Clytemnestra too for the murder she committed, they reply in all the con- 
fidence of the mother-right: 'The man she killed was not of her own 
blood." 126 "But am I of my mother's?" Orestes sneers. The Furies are ap- 
palled: "Vile wretch, she nourished you in her own womb. Do you disown 
your mother's blood?" . . . "Do you deny you were bom of woman?" 127 This 
might appear a difficult allegation to deny, but Greek patriarchy had already 
formulated a rather surprisingly politicized version of biology which Apollo 
expounds: 

The mother is not the parent of the child 

Which is called hers. She is the nurse who tends the growth 

Of young seed planted by its true parent, the male. 

So, if Fate spares the child, she keeps it, as one might 

Keep for some friend a growing plant . , . 

Father without mother may beget . . . 

This last statement would seem to be carrying the discovery of paternity, the 
knowledge of the seed, rather too far. In finding out his own part in the 

126 With the one stated exception, all quotations from the Evmeni&es are from Philip 
Vellacott's translation for the Penguin edition of the Oresteian trilogy. 

127 Here John Lewin's "Do you deny you were born of woman" strikes me as closer 
in spirit to the original. TJie Oresleia, rendered into English by John Lewin, University 
of Minnesota, 1966 (New York, Bantam, 1969). 



114 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




creation of human life, the male, who doubtless once believed that there 
could be motherhood without a father, has retaliated for his years of igno- 
rance with overstatement. Since the mother's role is observed, conspicuous, 
the child emerging from her very body, and the father's role only inferred, 
one cannot but feel a certain awkwardness in this total expropriation of 
fertility. In the event his genetics fail to persuade, Apollo, sounding some- 
thing like a mountebank, digs out the other card he holds in his sleeve: 

. . . We have 

Present, as proof, the daughter of Olympian Zeus: 

One never nursed in the dark cradle of the womb; 

This is the well-known device of hitting upon a quisling to deal the death 
blow. Athena, bom full-grown from the head of her father Zeus, marches on, 
spoiling to betray her kind: 

No mother gave me birth. Therefore the father's claim 
And male supremacy in all things, save to give 
Myself in marriage, wins my whole heart's loyalty 
Therefore a woman's death, who killed her husband, is, 
I judge, outweighted in grievousness by his. 

This sort of corroboration can be fatal. The Chorus of Furies may cry in 
vain "O Mother, O Darkness, look on us!" Zeus and the patriarchy have put 
out the eyes of the Great Mother while this "new" generation of gods "ride 
rough-shod over Elder Powers," casting out the old fertility goddesses who 
preceded the Titans. Apollo even baits them: "You have as little honor 
amongst elder gods as amongst us, the younger. I shall win." The trial is 
rigged; the Furies haven't a chance. 

Through Athena's deciding vote, Orestes is not only acquitted but rein- 
vested with his patrimony. Having entirely appropriated the creative force 
of fertility for the male, patriarchal dogma shall not stop short of devaluating 
female existence as well. And such is the force of the decision: "Zeus so 
ordained and Zeus was right . . . their two deaths are in no way to be com- 
pared" Apollo legislates, finding Clytemnestra, in taking the life of Agamem- 
non, husband, king and father, guilty of a very grave crime indeed, but 
exonerating Orestes in taking a woman's life, though it be his own mother's. 

The Furies, whose wrath Aeschylus had designed to give off the pathos of 
foregone defeat, are never permitted to pose any real threat, and lament 
helplessly: 

The old is trampled by the new! 

Curse on you younger gods who overrule 

The ancient laws . . . 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



"5 



The Furies, who are of course fertility goddesses, had considered wreaking 
their revenge in a murrain all over Greece, "a sterile blight" on "plant and 
child." But Athena stands by to cajole them out of their rage and into an 
ancillary role within the new order. By dint of fair talk and the threat that 
since their day is over they would be wise to co-operate, she coaxes the Furies 
into a bargain which appears to afford them no benefits beyond survival— yet 
is an absolute necessity to the new order. For all his boasting that he is the 
sole source of life, patriarchal man, by tacit concession, appears to acknowl- 
edge that he cannot prosper without the assistance of the female principle. 
So Athena wheedles the Furies to provide. 

Blessings from earth and sea and sky; blessing that breathes 
In wind and sunlight through the land; that beast and field 
Enrich my people with unwearied fruitfulness, 
And armies of brave sons be bom . . , 

Ignominious in their defeat, The Furies jump at the offer of a home in 
Athens and launch into five pages of local chamber of commerce rhapsody. 
In Aeschylus' dramatization of the myth one is permitted to see patriarchy con- 
front matriarchy, confound it through the knowledge of paternity, and come 
off triumphant. Until Ibsen's Nora slammed the door announcing the sexual 
revolution, this triumph went nearly uncontested. 

Ill Digression on the Evtdencb of Sexuality 

Bachofen had felt the importance of the knowledge of paternity and was 
therefore attracted to mythic and religious statements such as the Eumenides 
furnishes. But, understandably, he refused to rely too heavily on such sources 
as evidence either as to the discovery of paternity or as to its part in the 
origins of patriarchy. He sought other reasons. For his part, Engels was not 
only suspicious of what he called the "mysticism" of Bachofen's thought when 
it touched on myth or religion, but was disinclined to accept such evidence 
in any case. 128 So he chose instead to follow Bachofen on a second and much 
less reliable hypothesis. Asking themselves how women allowed their sub- 
jection to overtake them, they responded with a naivete characteristic of 
their era, claiming that women submitted willingly to the sexual and social 
subjection of pairing and then monogamous marriage because in fact women 
find sexuality burdensome. 129 "They constandy longed for relief by the right 

128 jjj imagining Bachofen was so naive as to represent "religion as the main lever of 
the world's history" Engels missed Bachofen's point altogether. Changes in the relation 
of the sexes are not made by but only reflected in religion. What was reflected was the 
discovery o£ paternity, and it is this which Engels failed to appreciate. 

129 Members of the patriarchal school outlawed the possibility of promiscuity or group 
marriage altogether. Maine was convinced that sexual jealousy was an inherent instinct 
in the male and would never have permitted it. Both factions were, to some degree at 
least, repelled or made uneasy by the prospect of unregulated sexual activity. 



'li ' 



116 SEXUAL POLITICS 

of chastity," 130 Engels informs us and therefore accepted the exclusive sexual 
possession with which patriarchy originated as a not unwelcome "penalty" 
for "becoming exempt from the ancient community of men and acquiring 
the right of surrendering to one man only." 131 

One is tempted to see an absurdity in such confident assumption that 
women dislike sex. Moreover, there is something unconsciously patriarchal 
in the assumption that sexual association involves "surrender" as well as in the 
inference that sexual intercourse is in fact (for women) a political act of 
submission. One cannot help but be unfavorably impressed at the extent to 
which Engels' attitudes are affected by the presuppositions of his culture. But 
in fact, he is only being Victorian. The point of his remark was the wide- 
spread appreciation in his own period that, however much sexual resistance 
militated against the woman's own sensual desires (and the possibility of 
their existing in any intensity was largely disregarded) it was nevertheless 
an act of self assertion. The notion of sexual resistance, the defense of in- 
tegrity with frigidity, or the preservation of independence through chastity, 
are common themes in Victorian literature. Under the demands of a socially 
coercive or exploitative sexuality such as patriarchy had instituted, where 
sexual activity implied submitting to male will, "chastity," frigidity, or some 
form of resistance to sexuality took on something of the character of a 
"political" response to the conditions of sexual politics. While chastity, or 
even the negative attitudes toward coitus which accompany frigidity, oper- 
ated as patriarchal social and psychological "stratagems" to limit or prohibit 
woman's pleasure in sexuality, they could also be transformed into protective 
feminine "stratagems" in a refusal to capitulate to patriarchal force: physical, 
economic, or social. 

While trying to explain conditions prior to patriarchy, Engels reasoned 
according to assumptions becoming only to patriarchal conditions. And, since 
it has until very recently been a scientific football or a swamp of superstitious 
misinformation, he was also ignorant of the nature of female sexuality. In 
view of recent research in this subject there is little reason to imagine woman 
would have welcomed in pairing or monogamous marriage a form of sexual 
association which, in limiting the demands upon her sexually, also involved 
the subjection of her sensuality, and by extension, of her self, to the will of 
another. All the best scientific evidence today unmistakably tends toward 
the conclusion that the female possesses, biologically and inherently, a far 
greater capacity for sexuality than the male, both as to frequency of coitus, 
and as to frequency of orgasm in coition. 

Even without the aid of science, common sense would persuade anyone 
who chose to ponder the fact that prostitution requires the female to engage 
in intercourse with a frequency impossible for males. Yet such sexual ex- 
perience is only quantitative and physiologically passive, as it does not imply 

130 Engels, op. cat., p. 6;. 
iai Ibid., p. 62. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



117 



0r gasm. 132 Prostitutes have little need and usually little opportunity to ac- 
company their availability with either orgasm or pleasure. Their sexual ex- 
perience is in some manner forced (through economic or through devious 
psychological needs) and is hard to construe as freely chosen. 

Yet the studies of Masters and Johnson prove that the female sexual cycle 
is capable of multiple orgasms in quick succession, each of which is analogous 
to the detumescence, ejaculation, and loss of erection in the male. With 
proper stimulation, a woman is capable of multiple orgasms in quick suc- 
cession. 

If a female who is capable of having regular orgasms is properly stimulated 
within a short period after her first climax, she will, in most instances, be 
capable of having a second, third, fourth, and even a fifth and sixth orgasm 
before she is fully satiated. As contrasted with the male's usual inability to have 
more than one orgasm in a short period, many females, especially when cli- 
torally stimulated, can regularly have five or six full orgasms within a matter 
of minutes. 133 

In view of the long-standing belief in the existence of a "vaginal orgasm" 
it might be emphasized that the clitoris is the organ specific to sexuality in 
the human female, the vagina being an organ of reproduction as well as of 
sexuality, and possessing no erogenous tissue save in the lower third of the 
vaginal tract, the nerve endings in these cells all deriving from and centering 
in the clitoris. While there is no "vaginal orgasm" per se, there is of course 
orgasm in vaginal coitus (arid probably one of a different experiential char- 
acter than that produced by exclusively clitoral stimulation) just as on any 
occasion when the clitoris is properly stimulated. In heterosexual intercourse, 
female orgasm is due to the friction of the penis upon the clitoral head or 
glans and the labia minora of the clitoral area. A distinction must be made 
between the locus of arousal and the locus of response. The seat of response 
is in the clitoris, which triggers other responses (the enlargement of the 
labia majora, the flow of transudate, vaginal spasms, etc.). Sexual arousal 
may have its source in the stimulation of body tissues, erogenous or otherwise, 
or in purely psychological excitation (thoughts, emotions, words, pictures, 
etc.)- The clitoris, one might point out, is the only human organ which is 
specific to sexuality and to sexual pleasure: the penis has other functions 
both in elimination and in reproduction. 

While the male's sexual potential is limited, the female's appears to be 

132 So little does the sexual activity of a prostitute give itself to orgasm that prostitutes 
tend to develop a condition known as Taylor's syndrome, a painful chronic congestion 
in the pelvic area, the result of experiencing sexual arousal unaccompanied by that re- 
lease of vascular congestion and tension which is experienced in the orgasm. 

1SS\V, H. Masters and Virginia Johnson, "Orgasm, Anatomy of the Female," in 
Encyclopedia of Sexual Behavior, ed. by A. Ellis and A. Abarbanel CNew York, Haw- 
thorn Books, 1 961), Vol. 2, p. 792. 



I A) 



V '1 



u8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



biologically nearly inexhaustible, and apart from psychological considera- 
tions, may continue until physical exhaustion interposes. 

The average female with optimal arousal will usually be satisfied with three to 
five manually-induced orgasms; whereas mechanical stimulation, as with the 
electric vibrator, is less tiring and induces her to go on to long stimulative 
sessions of an hour or more during which she may have twenty to fifty con- 
secutive orgasms. She will stop only when totally exhausted. 134 

In an important article on the implications of such research, Dr. Sherfey 
makes the following observation upon these findings: 

No doubt the most far reaching hypothesis extrapolated from these biological 
data is the existence of a universal and physically normal condition of woman's 
inability ever to reach complete sexual satiation in the presence of the most 
intense, repetitive orgasmic experiences, no matter how produced. Theoretically, 
a woman could go on having orgasms indefinitely if physical exhaustion did 
not intervene. 135 

In view of Sherfey's overemphasis upon insatiability, it is perhaps necessary 
to stress that despite an enormous biological orgasmic capacity, exhaustion 
can and does intervene in strict accordance with the amount of tension and 
energy expended; greater in the case of the penis's friction in coitus; lesser 
in the case of manual or mechanical stimulation. In that sense, female, like 
male, sexuality is limited. Moreover, biological capacity is hardly psychologi- 
cal need, nor does it always correspond to psychic satisfaction. It is perhaps 
unnecessary to point out that whatever her biological capacities for sexuality, 
as a human being, the female is just as able to sublimate them as is the male! 
And as a member of society, her sexuality is very subject to social forces. So 
much is this the case that the conditions of patriarchal society have had such 
profound effects upon female sexuality that its function has been drastically 
affected, its true character long distorted and long unknown. 136 This is 
remarkable evidence of culture's ability to affect physiology. 

That the nature of female sexuality has been so long uninvestigated says 
much for the direction knowledge takes from social circumstances. Given 
woman's extraordinary biological potentiality for sexual arousal and pleasure, 
no form of sexual association would have satisfied it less than monogamy or 

" 4 ^\v?' MaStCTS ** qU ° ted by ^ Mary * ane Sherfe y- M- J. Sherfey, "The Evolu- 
tion and Nature of Female Sexuality in Relation to Psychoanalytic Theory," The Journal 
of the American Psychoanalytic Association, Vol. 14, January ip66, no. 1 (New York 
International Universities Press, Inc.), p. 792. 

lss Sherfey, of. at., p. 117. 

"OThe experience of woman herself has not been consulted often in history, but so 
strong ,s her conditioning, that such evidence is itself unreliable: generations of women 
have comforted Freudian analysts as to the reality of the vaginal orgasms they were 
expected and even enjoined to experience. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



"9 



polygyny; none more than group marriage. Yet Engels' conviction that women 
should have preferred the limited sexuality imposed on them by paired mar- 
riage is an interesting comment both upon the sexual "climate" of his period 
and upon the implications which sexuality takes on within social contexts 
such as patriarchy. Patriarchal myth and belief had always assumed greater 
sexual capacity in the male and argued from it a greater need which lent 
sanction to the double standard and perhaps even to polygyny. 187 This is 
an expedient assumption even if in direct contradiction to biological fact. It 
is doubtless behind Engels' fancy as to the burdensome claims of the "com- 
munity of men" which women so longed to escape they accepted every other 
form of subordination. 

The effect of patriarchal social conditions upon women with regard to 
their sexual lives has had enormous and even anomalous results. One marvels 
at the proof of socialization's powers found in the fact that the vast 
inherent potential of female sexuality had come, by Engels' time, to be nearly 
totally obscured through cultural restraints. 138 One also observes the para- 
doxical situation that while patriarchy tends to convert woman to a sexual 
object, she has not been encouraged to enjoy the sexuality which is agreed 
to be her fate. Instead, she is made to suffer for and be ashamed of her 
sexuality, while in general not permitted to rise above the level of a nearly 
exclusively sexual existence. For the great mass of women throughout history 
have been confined to the cultural level of animal life in providing the male 
with sexual outlet and exercising the animal functions of reproduction and 
care of the young. Thus the female has had sexuality visited upon her as a 
punishment in a way of life which, with few exceptions, lse and apart from 
maternity, did not encourage her to derive pleasure in sexuality and limited 
her to an existence otherwise comprised mainly of menial labor and domestic 
service. 

Only with the relaxation of sexual mores and the lifting of the major 
prohibitions against woman's pleasure in sexuality, together with the changes 
which the first phase of the sexual revolution had brought about in social 
attitudes and in her social position— changes so deep and pervasive that even 

137 Under polygyny of the representative Islamic sort which licenses one male to have 
sole access and total possession of four women, the ratio of sexual opportunity is one to 
sixteen; each woman has one fourth of a male's sexual potential, whereas the male has 
that of four women. Under the double standard, the ratio regarding wife and mistress is 
one to four in favor of the male's opportunity for satisfaction. These are ironic circum- 
stances when one considers the relative sexual capacity of each sex. 

188 That the conditions of the Victorian period still obtain among us today is confirmed 
by a study of sexual attitudes done among the white working class, Rainwater's And the 
Poor Get Children. One third of the women in this sample were totally negative toward 
sexuality, and another third largely so. Among both men and women in the study it 
was agreed that "sex is for the man"— undertaken for his need and pleasure. 

136 Prostitutes are less exceptional here than they might appear. The purpose of their 
sexual activity is not their own pleasure: a fact which has been recognized since the 
earliest definitions of their function. 




i2o SEXUAL POLITICS 

the ensuing period of reaction could not erase their effect— only then could 
the potential capacity of the female's sexuality reassert itself in any general 
way. Yet while placing the greatest emphasis on social changes which af- 
forded women education, divorce, economic independence, and greater social 
freedom, one need not underestimate the influence of increased physiological 
understanding and improved sexual technique. What was the beginning, in 
the West at least, of a less oppressively masculine-oriented sexual technique 
(another legacy of the first phase of sexual revolution) has also contributed 
to the diminution of that enormous cultural inhibition and distortion which 
patriarchal conditions had imposed upon woman's bio-sexual organic base. 

IV The Revolutionahy Substance 

The great value of Engels' contribution to the sexual revolution lay in his 
analysis of patriarchal marriage and family. Whatever his difficulties in ac- 
counting for the genesis of these institutions, the very fact of his attempt to 
demonstrate that they were not an eternal feature of life was in itself a 
radical departure. The scholars upon whose work his own is built had of 
course done so as well, but never with Engels' intentions. Bachofen's interest 
was myth; Morgan's ethnology. That Engels could subsume their theories into 
one of his own directed toward revolutionary social reorganization is proof 
of a pragmatic motivation in his study of prehistory. 

If patriarchal marriage and the family, though prehistoric, have their ori- 
gins in the human past, they cease to be immutable, and become subject 
to alteration. In treating them as historical institutions, subject to the same 
processes of evolution as other social phenomena, Engels had laid the sacred 
open to serious criticism, analysis, even to possible drastic reorganization. 
Whatever the validity of his thesis that the institution of marriage (pairing 
and then monogamous) is the factor which ushered in the period of patri- 
archal rule, Engels' declaration that marriage and the family were built upon 
the ownership of women was a most damaging charge indeed. All the his- 
torical evidence of patriarchal law now supported Mill's charge of "domestic 
slavery" with a new vehemence. What Mill had thought to be a primordial 
evil, the inevitable consequence of man's original savagery, Engels' historical 
account transformed into an oppressive innovation, an innovation which 
brought with it innumerable other forms of oppression, each dependent upon 
it. Far from being the last injustice, sexual dominance became the keystone 
to the total structure of human injustice. 

The first course of social change as Engels had charted it 140 was from 
consanguine group marriage, to the Punaluan consanguine group, then to 
maternal gens, and finally to paternal gens. And when the gens converts from 
maternal to paternal lineage, inherited property (and primogeniture) have 

140 Engels' main source here was Morgan's Ancient Society, an account of social or- 
ganization as consanguine or gentiJe association, based both on the Amerindian peoples 
and those of the ancient Western world. 



Lift i 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION m 

already intruded as large factors in social and political life. Out of the gens 
or consanguine tribe who practiced democracy and held their land in com- 
mon, and finally at the expense and decay of the gens, there arose with the 
gradual evolution of patriarchy the following institutions: slavery (the model 
for all later class systems and itself modeled on the ownership of persons 
first established over women), chief dom, aristocracy, the social-political dif- 
ferentiation of economic groups into rich and poor. Finally, through the 
increasing importance of private property, with war serving as its catalyst, 
grew the state, the organ which solidified and maintained all social and 
economic disparities. Thus all the mechanisms of human inequality arose 
out of the foundations of male supremacy and the subjection of women, 
sexual politics serving historically as the foundation of all other social, politi- 
cal, and economic structures. Pairing marriages incorporated human barter, 
the buying and selling of women, in itself an instructive precedent for the 
indiscriminate human slavery which arose thereafter. Under patriarchy, the 
concept of property advanced from its simple origins in chattel womanhood, 
to private ownership of goods, land, and capital. In the subjection of female 
to male, Engels (and Marx as well) saw the historical and conceptual proto- 
type of all subsequent power systems, all invidious economic relations, and 
the fact of oppression itself. 

The subjection of women is of course far more than an economic or even 
political event, but a total social and psychological phenomenon, a way of 
life, which Engels (whose psychology is less subtle and individualized than 
Mill's, and based upon collective states) frames in terms of class emotion : 

The first class antagonism appearing in history coincides with the development 
of the antagonism of man and wife in monogamy, and the first class oppres- 
sion with that of the female by the male sex. Monogamy was a great historical 
progress. But by the side of slavery and private property it marks at the same 
time that epoch which, reaching down to our days, takes with all progress also 
a step backwards, relatively speaking, and develops the welfare and advance- 
ment of one by the woe and submission of the other. It is the cellular form of 
civilized society which enables us to study the nature of its now fully developed 
contrasts and contradictions. 141 

Engels distinguishes between the economic classes of his own time by 
pointing out that the unpropertied classes make practical use of women, while 
the propertied, having others to serve them, convert her into a decorative or 
aesthetic object with only limited uses. In asserting that "sexual love in man's 
relation to woman becomes and can become the rule among the oppressed 
classes alone, among the proletarians," 142 Engels, in the time-honored man- 
ner of socialists, appears to romanticize the poor. His other arguments are 

141 Engels, op. cil., pp. 79-80. 
™lbid„ p. 86. 



lib 



" I! 
!; '' i 



122 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



more convincing. Patriarchy is less strongly entrenched economically among 
the dispossessed, for inherited property is germane to the foundation of pa- 
triarchal monogamy, and the poor are without property. The sequestration 
of women in the home had seriously decayed among the working class by 
his time through the employment of women in factories and eventually in 
their achieving, for the first time, a right to the profit of their labors. Then 
too, the legal enforcement of patriarchal law is more difficult for the poor to 
obtain, since law is an expensive commodity. But Engels also ignores the fact 
that woman is viewed, emotionally and psychologically, as chattel property 
by the poor as well as, and often even more than, the rich. Lacking other 
claims to status a working class male is still more prone to seek them in his 
sexual rank, often brutally asserted. 

Were it not sufficient to account for so much social iniquity through the 
two most revered forms in his culture, marriage and the family, Engels pro- 
ceeded to point out that the monogamy it so publicly admired scarcely existed 
in fact, and that the term "monogamous marriage" was itself something of a 
misnomer. Primarily, it is only the female who was obliged to be monogamous, 
since males have traditionally reserved for themselves certain polygynous 
privileges through the double standard "for the simple reason that they 
[males], never, even to this day, had the least intention of renouncing the 
pleasures of group marriage." 143 

Engels is refreshingly frank about prostitution, a subject as obscured in 
his own time, through chivalrous tergiversation as, in ours, it is confused 
through a thoughdess equation of sexual freedom with sexual exploita- 
tion. 14 * Prostitution is, as Engels demonstrates, the natural product of tra- 
ditional monogamous marriage. This assertion is capable of proof on a 
number of grounds, the simplest being numerical. When chastity is pre- 
scribed and adultery severely punished in women, marriage becomes monog- 
amous for women rather than men, yet there should not be sufficient females 
to satisfy masculine demand unless a sector of women, usually from among the 
poor, are bred or reserved for sexual exploitation. This group, who among us, 
are largely enlisted from the socially and economically exploited racial minor- 
ities, were in Engels' industrial England that group of poor below the working 
class. Smaller numbers are often set apart for additional services, such as 
conversation or entertainment: hetaera, geisha, courtesan, and call girl. Whac- 
ks Ik«I., P . 65. 

141 Reform here should mean that society should cease to punish the promiscuity in 
women it does not think to punish in men. This does not, and should not, mean govern- 
mental institution and regulation, which under the deceptive rationale of greater safety 
for the client, creates an approved and convenient captivity for the prostitute victim. As 
those causes of prostitution which are not economic are psychological, it is pointless for 
the state to intervene either to prohibit or to regulate. Only changes in economic oppor- 
tunity and social and psychological attitude can work effectively toward eliminating 
prostitution. 



J 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



113 



ever society's official attitude may be, the demand for prostitution continues 
within male-supremacist culture, 146 and as Engels describes it, prostitution 

is as much a social institution as all others. It continues the old sexual free- 
dom—for the benefit of the men. In reality not only permitted, but also assidu- 
ously practiced by the ruling class, it is denounced only nominally. Still in 
practice, this denunciation strikes by no means the men who indulge in it, but 
only the women. These are ostracised and cast out of society, in order to pro- 
claim once more the fundamental law of unconditional male supremacy over 
the female sex. 146 

In this last statement one might find some explanation for the persistence of 
prostitution even after the reforms of the first phase of the sexual revolution 
Had helped to undermine woman's economic vulnerability and relaxed 
sexual mores had facilitated the practice of extramarital sexuality for both 
sexes. Men who might be sexually accommodated by casual pickups without 
expense still provide a demand for prostitution, supplied at times even by 
women who are not under economic compulsion. In the case of each partner 
to such prostitution, some need to "proclaim" or at least affirm male supremacy 
through the humiliation of woman seems to play a leading role. Prostitution, 
when unmotivated by economic need, might well be defined as a species of 
psychological addiction, built on self-hatred through repetitions of the act of 
sale by which a whore is defined. While such self-denigration is extreme, it 
is not inexplicable within patriarchal society which tends to hold women in 
contempt, a contempt which is particularly intense in association with female 
sexuality. There is also a sense in which the prostitute's role is an exaggeration 
of patriarchal economic conditions where the majority of females are driven 
to live through some exchange of sexuality for support. The degradation 
in which the prostitute is held and holds herself, the punitive attitude society 
adopts toward her, are but reflections of a culture whose general attitudes 
toward sexuality are negative and which attaches great penalties to a promis- 
cuity in women it does not think to punish in men. 

Having examined marriage, Engels turns his attention to the patriarchal 
family, as precious to the Victorians as it later became to conservative sociol- 
ogy in the period of reaction. In Engels' tart phrase, the family's "essential 
points are the assimilation of the unfree element and the paternal author- 
ity." 147 "It is founded on male supremacy for the pronounced purpose of 
breeding children of indisputable paternal lineage. The latter is required 
because these children shall later on inherit the fortune of their father." 148 

146 Communist China is said to be the only country in the world which has no 
prostitution. 

146 Engels, op. cit., p. 8r. 
1V! lhi&., p. 70. 
148 Ibid., p. 79. 



11 



124 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Despite the decline of inherited wealth, this is still so; legitimacy is quite as 
important now, and thought to justify the cost and education of rearing 
the young in the nuclear family. 

The ideal type of the patriarchal family and the ancestor of our own is the 
Roman family, whence come both the term and the legal forms and prece- 
dents used in the West. Originally, the word familia did not, Engels cheer- 
fully informs us 

. . . signify the composite ideal of sentimentality and domestic strife in the 
present day philistine mind. Among the Romans it did not even apply in the 
beginning to the leading couple and its children, but to the slaves alone. Famu- 
lus means domestic slave, and familia is the aggregate number of slaves belonging 
to one man . . . The expression [familia] was invented by the Romans in order 
to designate a new social organism the head of which had a wife, children 
and a number of slaves under his paternal authority and according to Roman 
law, the right of life and death over all of them. 149 

To this, Engels adds Marx's observation that 

the word is, therefore, not older than the ironclad family system of the Latin 
tribes, which arose after the introduction of agriculture and of lawful slavery 
. . . The modem family contains the germ not only of slavery (servitus) but 
also of serfdom ... It comprises in miniature all those contrasts that later on 
develop more broadly in society and the state. 150 

In noting its economic character Engels is calling attention to the fact 
that the family is actually a financial unit, something which his contem- 
poraries, like our own, prefer to ignore. Due to the nature of its origins, die 
family is committed to the idea of property in persons and in goods. "Monog- 
amy was the first form of the family not founded on natural but on economic 
conditions, viz. the victory of private property over primitive and natural 
collectivism." 161 

Whatever the value of Engels' insistence on the priority of a "primitive 
and natural collectivism," the cohesion of the patriarchal family and the 
authority of its head have consistendy relied (and continue to do so) on the 
economic dependence of its members. 152 Its stability and its efficiency also 
rely upon its ability to divide its members by hierarchical roles and maintain 
them in such through innumerable forms of coercion— social, religious, legal, 
ideological, etc. As Engels makes clear, such a collection of persons cannot be 

mibid., pp. 70-71, 
i«°I&d., p. 71. 

161 Ibid., p. 79. 

162 Can it be that the first group of persons owned (even if only temporarily) is that 
of children? Could it be that they should also be the last? 



r ,1 
¦¦,)\\ 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



I2J 



said to be free agents. Historically, nearly the entire basis of their associa- 
tion is not affection but constraint: much of it remains so. 

Engels' analysis is not simply negative. It does in fact provide a model for 
change. His proposals are both equitable and feasible recommendations for 
the general conduct of sexuality in a revolutionary society. He has a certain 
reasonable appreciation of fidelity and advocates temporary associations, 
freed of the economic considerations of the older forms and based on "indi- 
vidual sexlove," his own precise if rather colorless phrase for a phenomenon 
whose development he traces to fairly recent times, and evolving from 
courtly and romantic love. In insisting that the economic element be utterly 
purged from all sexual associations Engels went beyond other nineteenth- 
century theorists by arguing that marriage would continue to be a variety of 
prostitution (e.g., sex in return for money or commodities]) until it ceases to 
be in any sense an involuntary contract essentially economic in character. 
The analogy he adopts here is interesting: a woman who enters upon or 
perseveres in a marriage for economic motives is in the position of a worker 
who contracts himself to an employment disadvantageous to his interests or 
inclinations, merely in order to eat. Other theorists— Mill, for example— urged 
woman's right to work, to enter the professions etc., but imagined many 
women and most married women would remain in the home tending children 
and continuing in economic dependency. But Engels is both more logical 
and more radical: only with the end of male economic dominion and the 
entrance of women into the economic world on perfectly equal and inde- 
pendent terms will sexual love cease to be barter in some manner based on 
financial coercion. 

Quite as one would expect, Engels' foresight is strongest in the area of 
economy. Mill had thought legal change would be sufficient and was content 
that if women obtained suffrage and a just property law, most might well 
continue in their traditional roles. Engels realized very well that woman's 
legal disabilities were not the cause but merely the effect of patriarchy. The 
removal of such invidious law would not give women equal status unless it 
were accompanied with total social and economic equality and every oppor- 
tunity of personal fulfillment in productive work. Engels' argument that one 
cannot be a dependent and still an equal is very compelling. There is no free 
contract, such as marriage might ideally become, Engels insists, unless both 
members are free in every respect, including the economic. Here his argu- 
ment is based on the observation that the concentration of all economic re- 
sources into male hands has made the relation of the sexes much like that of 
one economic class to another: 

The modern monogamous family is founded on the open or disguised domestic 
slavery of women, and modern society is composed of molecules in the form 
of monogamous families. In the great majority of cases the man has to earn a 



126 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



living and to support his family, at least among the possessing classes. He 
thereby obtains a superior position that has no need of any legal special privi- 
lege. In the family he is the bourgeois, the woman represents the proletariat "3 

One can judge the depth of Engels' radicalism by realizing that in this argu- 
ment he has not only exceeded the analysis or the reforms urged by his 
contemporaries, he has pointed out the very stumbling block to further revo- 
lution. For the family did not give way. Comment upon the success of that 
reaction which in the 1 920s followed the first phase of sexual revolution and 
whose energy centered about the family, the preservation of its roles and the 
necessity of their maintenance through the corollaries of "masculine" and 
"feminine" is all furnished by the fact that Engels' objections to marriage 
and the family are as valid today as they were in his own times. 

Again, using the analogy of the proletariat whose invidious economic and 
social position was never made completely clear until democracy had granted 
them legal equality, Engels insists that a sexual revolution, begun in the 
first phase with women's achievement of legal and minimal political equality, 
shall not be completed until it is economic and social as well: "the emanci- 
pation of women is primarily dependent on the reintroduction of the whole 
female sex into the public industries. To accomplish this, the monogamous 
family must cease to be the industrial unit of society." 164 

Engels was fully aware of how drastic, far-reaching, and significant a 
social change this might represent, but confident of the success both of so- 
cialist and sexual revolution, he prophesied with an optimism which has a 
somewhat melancholy effect today: "We are now approaching a social rev- 
olution in which the old economic foundations of monogamy will disap- 
pear just as surely as those of its complement prostitution ." 15B The revolution 
was then still to come— but soon. Nearly one hundred years later we yet 
await it. 

There is one more cardinal point in Engels' theory of sexual revolution, 
bound to provoke more controversy than all the others: "With the transfor- 
mation of the means of production into collective property, the monogamous 
family will cease to be the economic unit of society. The care and education 
of children hecomes a public matter," 1 ™ This last point is perhaps the most 
crucial of Engels 1 propositions, though it meets with the greatest resistance. 
There is something logical and even inevitable in this recommendation, for 
so long as every female, simply by virtue of her anatomy, is obliged, even 
forced, to be the sole or primary caretaker of childhood, she is prevented 
from being a free human being. The care of children, even from the period 

153 Engels, op. cit., p. 89. 

154 Ibid., p. 90. Italics added. 

15B Ibid., pp. 91-92. Italics added. 
156 Ibid., pp. 191-92. 



THE SEXIML REVOLUTION 



127 



when their cognitive powers first emerge, is infinitely better left to the best 
trained practitioners of both sexes who have chosen it as a vocation, rather 
than to harried and all too frequently unhappy persons with little time nor 
taste for the work of educating minds, however young or beloved. The radi- 
cal outcome of Engels' analysis is that the family, as that term is presently 
understood, must go. In view of the institution's history, this is a kind fate. 
Engels was heresy in his age. These many decades after, he is heresy still. 
But revolution is always heresy, perhaps sexual revolution most of all. 



LITERARY 

One can locate three different responses to the sexual revolution in the lit- 
erature of the period. The first is the realistic or revolutionary. It took in a 
wide spectrum of radical analysis from Engels to Mill, to the critics and 
reformers such as Ibsen and Shaw, to the moderates such as Dickens and 
Meredith. If a critical attitude toward the sexual politics of patriarchy pre- 
cedes reform, reform itself precedes revolution. The first school expressed 
themselves either deliberately in theory or polemic, or indirectly in the fictive 
situations of the theatre or the novel. 

The second response belongs to the sentimental and chivalrous school of 
which Ruskin's "Of Queen's Gardens" is the best and most complete example. 
It operates through an appeal to propriety and protestation of its good inten- 
tions, rather than through any specific recommendations for change. In fact, 
its general intention is to forestall change of any kind by proclaiming the 
status quo both good and natural. It presupposes an ideal state of awed 
reverence toward virtuous womanhood while it temporizes hypocritically on 
the issue of status, idly pretending an eagerness to award a superior position 
to a group to whom in fact it begrudges egalitarian place, for it is designed 
specifically to meet the challenge of "levelers." Loath to make any economic 
concessions, it sentimentalizes the monogamous family, which it refuses to 
see as an economic unit and would defend to the death, At its most gen- 
erous moments it might regretfully permit a few legal reforms; but on 
the whole it finds even these unnecessary, for since all good men cherish 
their good wives, the fact that they legally own them is not sufficiently im- 
portant to deserve mention. Even education is a disagreeable subject with the 
chivalrous because a decorative and slender instruction is not only feminine 
and aesthetic, it also complements masculine higher learning. Serious educa- 
tion for women is perceived, consciously or unconsciously, as a threat to 
patriarchal marriage, domestic sentiment, and ultimately to male supremacy- 
economic, social, and psychological. The phenomena of prostitution or of 
poverty, the plight of many women at the time, can, under this benign sen- 



» 



12.8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



timentality, only be deplored. Poverty may be glossed over as a problem to 
be dealt with through the trivial offices of charity assigned to the female 
sphere, As to prostitution, it is better ignored as unfit for discussion, especially 
in polite or literary contexts, or in circles where it might cause a "blush" to 
arise. Most Victorian poetry is deliberately escapist, resolutely shunning the 
contemporary world as the verse of probably no other period before had 
dared to do. Poetry itself has nearly always been identified with the ruling 
class, its views, values, and interests. Only in the novel did the real world 
openly intrude. And for all the decorous disguises it assumed in the Vic- 
torian novel, the actual contemporary world did intrude very often; the ugly 
facts of sexual politics and the upsetting facts of the sexual revolution along 
with it. Yet here too the chivalrous mentality exerted itself and infested can- 
did discussion. 

The third school, which we shall call the school of fantasy, involves itself 
with a point of view nearly exclusively masculine, It often expresses the un- 
conscious emotions of male response to what it perceives as feminine evil, 
namely, sexuality. However much this may resemble the old myth of femi- 
nine evil, there is something new about it— it is painfully self-conscious. 
Finding that there was much in its culture it could no longer take for granted, 
the Victorian period tends to exaggerate and be ill at ease in traditional ges- 
tures. In its fantasies of feminine evil there is something so uneasily self- 
aware that a number of tensions and overtones appear which one had not 
usually met with before in this convention. The disparity between the good 
and the evil, chaste and sensuous woman, figures older than Christianity, 
becomes far more overt than it had ever been previously, partly because the 
cover of religious sanction afforded by the figures of Eve and Mary had 
pretty well collapsed. Earlier periods had also cherished two separate and con- 
tradictory versions of woman— one vicious, one adulatory. But in no period 
of Western literature had the question of the sexual politics or of woman's 
experience within it grown so vexing and insistent as it did in this. The 
myth of feminine evil appears more in the poetry of the age than in other 
literary forms. In the novel feminine evil is too likely to wear the recognizable 
social and economic garments of prostitution or penury; in prose fiction the 
sexuality projected upon the female demands the more honest explanation of 
the whore, the "fallen woman," the servant seduced: Nancy, Tess, Esther 
Waters. The more accommodating vehicle of myth which is proper to poetry, 
deals actually— and rather transparently— with a sexuality the male has per- 
ceived in himself, and despising it, casts upon the woman. In the poetry of 
Tennyson, the myth combines with the other period legend of chivalry, 
and masculine sensibility weighs the virtuous woman against the vicious 
woman. We are told that it is the first of whom the poet approves, even if he 
fails to demonstrate it. Later on in Victorian poetry, there is less and less re- 
sort to chivalrous palliation. And with Rossetu" and Swinburne, even the 
eternal need to vent disapproval on the malefic woman begins to disappear. 




THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



129 



It does so with a curious and highly significant novelty; what was once simply 
evil and terrifying remains all this, perhaps even more so, but it is now won- 
derfully attractive as well. The bitch goddess whom Mailer's Rojack right- 
eously strangles is transformed by fin de Steele into a dazzling apparition be- 
fore whom a poet like Swinburne is willing to prostrate himself in paroxysms 
of masochistic ecstasy, and a playwright like Wilde is even willing to go so 
far as to identify himself with. 

The fantastic is the most ambivalent of the three schools of attitude. 
Each of the first two had a definite stand to take for or against the sexual 
revolution, but the third is confused in its response. Despite fantasy's elusive 
and escapist manner (for it usually refused to face social realities even more 
resolutely than chivalry, which had at least troubled to prepare a formula), it 
had a considerable contribution to make to the sexual revolution. Through 
its tactics of refuge in the unconscious and in fantasy, it released more sexual 
energy and expressed more tenuous and deeply buried sexual attitudes than 
did its rivals, As a result it was in the vanguard of the sexual revolution in 
the area of sexuality itself; suggesting, however unsystematically, greater 
measures for relief in the areas of sexual mores and sexual "deviance," than 
any other. It was the center also of homosexual sentiment, and of certain 
other practices, which, unlike homosexuality, deserve to be labeled as sexually 
perverse. 

Although its means were irrational and often circuitous, occasionally 
even perverse, it was able to explore sexual politics at an inchoate primary 
level. The chivalrous school, deeply anti-revolutionary and conservative, was, 
by comparison, utterly unproductive save for its empty proclamations. It was 
the realists and the fantasists who brought about the revolution, However, the 
first group were far more practical and to the point, the fantasists often so 
incoherent as to be liable to subversion, and sometimes so ambivalent that 
they could hardly be relied upon for more than that cultural information 
which all representative fantasy affords. 

It should be remembered that only at the extreme of each class were un- 
mixed attitudes to be found; needless to say, all three were coterminous. Re- 
formers were often afraid of the effects of any relaxation of sexual mores; 
members of the fantasy school were afraid, delighted, and guilty all at once. 
Reforming novels were also full of chivalrous sentiment, even given to op- 
timistic assurances that the unpleasantness they described was unique or 
exceptional and could be solved by love alone. 

It is impossible, even in a chapter so embarrassingly lengthy, to do any 
real justice to the literature of the first phase, a subject which merits a treat- 
ment of its own in one or several volumes. It is imperative therefore that we 
limit ourselves to these few generalizations and to an examination of a small 
number of lesser-known but representative works. The most famous products 
of revolutionary agitation, the plays of Shaw and Ibsen, the work of Virginia 
Woolf, are, whatever their present fortunes, perhaps too familiar. It seemed 



.11 : 



130 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



more interesting to hit upon a few texts which are not much read, or not read 
in this context, to furnish us with key examples— three novels by Hardy, 
Meredith, and Charlotte Bronte, and a prose poem by Oscar Wilde. 

Thomas Hardy's fade the Obscure gives an account of the trials of two 
rebels: Jude is battling the class system in trying to obtain the Oxford edu- 
cation reserved for the elite; Sue Bridehead has set herself against a number 
of patriarchal institutions, principally marriage and the church. Both are 
beaten. Jude dies solitary and desolate with the merry echoes of Oxford's 
Eights Week boat races mocking his agony. Sue returns to the "fanatic prosti- 
tution" of living with her first husband, Richard Phillotson, a man she de- 
spised. 

Hardy's Jude is a complete human being composed of both sense and 
spirit, mind and body. In a classic instance of the Victorian triangle he is 
torn between two women who are incomplete beings. Arabella is at one 
pole, utter carnality, "a complete and substantial female animal— no more, 
no less." 107 In Hardy's grotesque parody of Cupid's shaft, they first meet 
when Arabella pitches the scrotum of a butchered barrow-pig at Jude's head. 
At the other pole stands Sue— pure spirit. They are the familiar Lily and 
Rose, but Sue is a lily with a difference— she has a brain. Yet she is repelled 
by sense, for Sue is not only the New Woman, but by a complex set of 
frequently unsympathetic defenses, at times convincing, and at times only a 
rather labored ambivalence of Hardy's own— she is the Frigid Woman as 
well. Hardy is disgusted by Arabella, appalled, if intrigued, by her crude 
and terrible vitality. He champions Sue through a series of uningratiating 
maneuvers, but he is always slightly nervous about her. In a defensive post- 
script written seventeen years after his first preface, he appears to have been 
rather embarrassed and even annoyed at what the public took her to be: 

After the issue of Jude the Obscure as a serial story in Germany, an experi- 
enced reviewer of that country informed the writer that Sue Bridehead, the 
heroine, was the first delineation in fiction of the woman who was coming 
into notice in her thousands every year— the woman of the feminist movement 
—that slight, pale, "bachelor" girl— the intellectualized, emancipated bundle of 
nerves, that modern conditions were producing, mainly in cities as yet; who 
does not Tecognize the necessity for most of her sex to follow marriage as a 
profession, and boast themselves as superior people because they are licensed 
to be loved on the premises. The regret of this critic was that the portrait of 
the newcomer had been left to be drawn by a man, and was not done by one 
of her own sex, who would never have allowed her to break down at the 
end. 168 

187 Thomas Hardy, ]vde the Obscure, first published in book form in 1895. (London: 
Macmillan Library Edition, 1951), p. 41. 

i&Slhid., p. x, 191 2 postscript to the Preface to the first edition. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



131 



The passage is wonderfully noncommittal: for all tbe sarcasm Hardy scat- 
ters at bachelor girls, colorless bags of emaciated nerves who are indistinguish- 
able from prostitutes since they are "licensed to be loved on the premises" 
and reject marriage as a "profession"— with the implication that there 
are but two professions for women— Hardy still never goes on to contradict 
his German critic. For it is still true that Sue is his heroine and that she had 
the temerity to be altogether down on marriage. There is a certain irony 
about the critic's last statement berating Hardy for allowing her to "break 
down at the end." Even though Hardy was far too astute, or far too timid, to 
permit himself to be identified with the notorious feminists, quite the finest 
thing in the book is his sensitive, perceptive account of Sue's capitulation. 

This is not to say that the portrait is without flaws. Sue is broken by the 
arbitrary death of her children; Hardy's murder— their own suicide. Even in 
her revolt against convention she is uncertain, confused, imperfectly con- 
vincing. Jude is inconsistent as well, but his dilemma is a simpler matter of 
being strung between what Hardy gives us to understand is the deterministic 
reflex action of his flesh, and the aspirations of his soul toward the Fathers 
and the Classics. His motivations are always made clear for us; Sue's are not. 
Like the Continental Naturalists, Hardy fancies he is following scientific law 
in awarding his characters instincts. Yet it is curious how sexual impulse is 
an instinct only in males; some females have it, others do not. 109 And when 
Sue is delivering her diatribes against marriage, Hardy is surely present but 
to a degree difficult to determine. He never commits himself to Sue as he did 
to Jude, and insists on seeing her obliquely or at a distance. As the center of 
consciousness in the novel is Jude's rather than Sue's, we never really under- 
stand what thought processes have brought her to the point of chanting Swin- 
burne's atheism in the Oxford moonlight before her clandestine pagan 
sculptures under the very nose of the High Anglican orthodoxy she so thor- 
oughly detests and so audaciously ridicules. 

It is Sue's defeat that persuades us, not her insurrection. Jude's ambitions 
were noble and of a kind the reader is made liable to identify with at once 
and without reservations. His defeat is tragic but never humiliating, for he 
had never betrayed his intentions nor ever surrendered to the system— it sim- 
ply overran and killed him. Through a series of back-slidings he has fallen 
into the clutches of Arabella for the third and final time, but these are mere 
physical weaknesses and Hardy would not have us concern ourselves with 
them overmuch. Class and poverty have conquered Jude. With Sue it is far 
otherwise. She collapses from within. Jude indulges in sexuality as his right 
and in a blundering fashion which is often at odds with his own career 
ambitions. But from the very beginning, from her first admirer, the Oxford 

158 One of the more awkward strands of "science" in tbe novel is the attribution o£ 
hereditary traits to its characters; Sue and Jude's failure in marriage is partly due to 
tbe fact that a number of their ancestors had also made a botch of it. 



It 




132 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



undergraduate whom she drove to suicide, Sue has held sexuality in terror, 
seen it as evil— her own evil. 

The clue to both Sue and Arabella is in their self-hatred and self-contempt. 
They despise womanhood. Arabella, a conqueror of men, a vaginal trap, 
a creature utterly devoid of any kind of compunction, helpfully explains her 
entire sex to Phillotson, squaring the plot's two triangles to a rectangle, while 
providing the mechanism for Sue's recapture and final internment: 

That's the only way with these fanciful women that chew high-innocent or 
guilty. She'd have come round in time. We all do! Custom does it! it's all 
the same in the end! ... I shouldn't have let her go! I should have kept 
her chained on— her spirit for kicking would have been broke soon enough! 
There's nothing like bondage and a stone deaf taskmaster for taming us women. 
Besides, you've got the laws on your side. Moses knew. Don't you call to mind 
what he says? ... I used to think o't when they read it in church, and I 
was carrying on a bit. "Then shall the man be guiltless; but the woman shall 
bear her iniquity." Damn rough on us women; but we must grin and put up 
wi' it!— Haw haw!— Well; she's got her deserts now. 160 

The moment her children are dead Sue breaks like a straw, finding in the 
atrocity of Father Time's population control— or Hardy's reaching for effect- 
ample evidence of divine retribution. All her shaky but hard-earned faith in 
her own intelligence and the critical analysis it had accomplished on the so- 
ciety she inhabited and was assailed by collapses before what she confesses 
is her "awe or terror of conventions I don't believe in. It comes over me at 
times like a sort of creeping paralysis." 161 It is sexual guilt that undoes Sue, 
guilt for ever having known freedom, joy, sexuality, Jude's love, or her cher- 
ished illegitimate children. 

When they are found hanged, Jude comforts himself with reciting the 
Agamemnon in Greek, but Sue's very soul despairs and dies. The mind that 
Jude had so admired and which is Hardy's most original note in the novel, 
that splendid intellect which had "scintillated like a star" 102 and seen the 
world as the mere error of a somnambulant First Cause, staggers and turns 
the full Force of her affliction into a malign Destiny's punishment for Sin. 
She falls to the level of lecturing her lover to the tune of "We must con- 
form . . . There is no choice ... It is no use fighting against God." 103 
From here on in she is to grovel at the foot of the cross. 

What lies at the root of her capitulation is patriarchy's ancient masochistic 
system: sex is female and evil. "I cannot humiliate myself too much. I should 
like to prick myself all over with pins and bleed out the badness that's in 

i°o Ibid., pp. 383-84. 

i°i Ibid. 

192 Ibid., p. 396. 

«si{,;d v p.4i 3 . 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



i33 



me." 104 Jude, who, like Hardy, has never been very sure whether "the 
women are to blame" and all the evils of life are inherent in their natures, or 
whether the problem is in "the artificial system of things, under which the 
normal sex impulses are turned into devilish domestic gins and springes to 
noose and hold back those who want to progress" 165 frantically exhorts Sue 
to remain true to her former insights : "Is a woman a thinking unit at all, or a 
fraction always wanting its integer?" 160 

Jude is mistaken. Sue is only too logical. She has understood the world, 
absorbed its propositions, and finally implemented that guilt which precipi- 
tated her self-hatred. Nothing remains to her but to destroy herself. She 
renounces all hope of bucking the system and in giving up she becomes a col- 
laborator who can out Victorian the Victorian slave-wife. In presenting her- 
self at Richard's bedroom door she is demonstrating the full hideous iniquity 
of conventional marriage which is Hardy's target in the novel. Her pro- 
nouncements now take on the semantic coloration of religious treacle; she 
mouths pious cliche" about "the error of my views:" 

We ought to be continually sacrificing ourselves on the altar of duty! But I 
have always striven to do what has pleased me. I well deserved the scourging 
I have got! I wish something would take the evil right out of me, and all my 
monstrous errors, and all my sinful ways! 167 

Her final psychotic self-mutilation in offering herself to Richard is the result 
not only of an abdication to period opinion but is also inspired by her sexual 
disappointment when she discovers Jude has betrayed her in returning to 
Arabella. Sue never had all of Jude and she knew it. Hardy, by inventing in 
Sue Bridehead a woman so "ethereal," has made it impossible for Jude's more 
complete humanity to be faithful to her. 

It is difficult to understand whether Sue is the victim of circumstances, 
principally those of her own social indoctrination and stronger than any 
truth that she might acquire on her own, or the victim of a cultural literary 
convention CTily and Rose) that in granting her a mind insists on with- 
holding a body from her, or finally, whether she is simply the victim of 
Hardy's irascible pessimism and the heavy-handed tragic device which pole- 
axes her hopes by hanging her children. 

Hardy himself seems unsure and the product of this uncertainty is that 
Sue^is by turns an enigma, a pathetic creature, a nut, and an iceberg. The 
book is a significant contribution to the literature of the sexual revolution in 
a number of ways— first, for its savage criticism of institutions— marriage and 
sexual ownership— its impassioned plea for easy divorce. Most of Hardy's 

Mlbid., p. 417. 
™Ibid., p. 261. 
196 Ibid., p. 424. 
WlbicL, p. 416. 



tMm 



134 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



,'H 



novels are this. Jude is the first of them where people manage to obtain divorce 
but even this cannot help them in a world where marriage is corrupt. Sec- 
ondly, Hard}' is to be commended for creating in Sue an intelligent rebel 
against sexual politics and in understanding the forces which defeat such a 
rebel. Finally, the novel's greatest fascination resides in its demonstration of 
how very difficult a struggle such a revolution can be— not only for its 
participants but even for the author who would describe it. Jude the Obscure 
is on very solid ground when attacking the class system, but when it turns to 
the sexual revolution, Hardy himself is troubled and confused. 

Nothing could be further removed from the air of grim futility Hardy 
breathed upon Jude the Obscure than Meredith's gay and civilized urbanity 
in The Egoist. Yet both novels attack the conventions surrounding patriarchal 
marriage. Meredith's plot is as slight and agreeable as any of Austen's. To 
say that the novel is nearly that good is high praise indeed. It too is a comedy 
of manners over the trifling question of "who she'll marry," but Meredith 
has made it the vehicle of much satire as well. The complexities of poverty 
within which Hardy had obscured the issues of sexual politics in Jude are not 
to be found in The Egoist, for Meredith deliberately chose to play out his 
scenes among the upper class, where one is most likely to find the extreme 
cases of social convention and artifice. He sensed that in this setting sex is 
most distorted by ritual etiquette, conventionalized language and emotion. 
Here the sex-as-barter system should be most unnecessary. Yet the economic 
factor does not cease to be operative. 

Meredith's heroine, Clara Middleton, has no money of her own and is 
prevented from earning any. She is therefore to be sold into security. It is 
Meredith's conviction that many of the evils of society are due to an uncon- 
scious and conditioned falseness, a sickness so thoroughly "socialized" that it 
lies below the level of even political remedy. In other words, he has discovered 
that sexual politics is a mental habit buried deep in our culture which 
transcends the politics of class, however deeply intertwined the two may be. 

Perhaps Meredith's most important contribution is his indictment of 
chivalry as a selfish custom of complacency which property and power have 
engendered in the male. The entire novel might have been based upon Mill's 
observations on the vicious effects that the superior status awarded to men 
must necessarily have upon their characters. For the book's real subject is its 
painstaking investigation of the egoist of its title; it is a veritable anatomy of 
masculine vanity in the person of Sir Willoughby Patterne. Here, for ex- 
ample, one is privileged to see the man in love: 

Clara was young, healthy, handsome; she was therefore fitted to be his wife, 
the mother of his children, his companion picture. Certainly they looked well 
side by side. In walking with her, in drooping to her, the whole man was made 
conscious of the female image of himself by her exquisite unlikeness. She 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



135 



completed htm, added the softer lines wanting to his portrait before the world. 
He had wooed her ragingly; he courted her becomingly; with the manly self- 
possession enlivened by watchful tact which is pleasing to girls. He never seemed 
to undervalue himself in valuing her. 108 

Meredith knows his subject. One might call it the case of a man who 
looked into his heart— and those of his fellows— and wrote. This is the 
manner in which Robert Louis Stevenson responded: 

Here is a book to send the blood into men's faces ... It is yourself that is 
hunted down; these are your faults that are dragged into the day and num- 
bered, with lingering relish, with cruel cunning and precision. A young friend 
of Mr. Meredith's (as I have the story) came to him in an agony. "This is too 
bad of you," he cried, "Willoughby is me!" "No, my dear fellow," said the 
author, "he is all of us." ... I am like the young friend of the anecdote— I think 
Willoughby an unmanly but a very serviceable exposure of myself. 180 

The surprising parallels to Meredith's own life are unmistakable. Clara Mid- 
dleton is his own first wife, Mary Nicolls. Her irresponsible epicurean parent 
is Thomas Love Peacock, Meredith's former father-in-law. Willoughby 
jilted is Meredith deserted after some seven years of bitter cohabitation, when 
Mary left him for Henry Wallis the painter. What is astonishing is that the 
book is not the revenge one would inevitably expect, but is instead a careful 
analysis of incompatibility. Willoughby's conceit is something Meredith recog- 
nizes in himself and everyman, part of his training and expectation; an 
unconscious tendency to overbear, yet a manner for which Meredith is will- 
ing to take responsibility. What is brilliant about the achievement is how 
much Meredith can reveal without unnecessary rancor. The entire satire is 
rendered in the most delightful comic spirit. 

Better even than such description is Meredith's explanation of how circum- 
stances are so arranged that there can be little peace between the sexes; Mere- 
dith not only knows how things are ordered in sexual politics, he knows why. 
His virtues lie in his sympathetic understanding of all his characters (even 
to the rare wonder of his comprehension of the women in the book— a feat of 
astounding empathy) and in his superb background information on the pow- 
ers of environment and conditioning that have made these people what they 
are. 

It is impossible to hate Willoughby, so thoroughly do we come to know 
that conspiracy of worship which has labored to construct his vanity, fond 
product of a lifetime association with obsequious female dependents who have 
convinced him he is god. Raised by a doting mother and two demented 

168 George Meredith, The Egoist, first published in 1879. (Cambridge, Massachusetts; 
Riverside Press, 1958), p. 36. 

169 Quoted in Lionel Stevenson's Introduction to the Riverside Edition, The source 
is R. L. Stevenson's essay, "Books Which Have Influenced Me." 



136 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



aunts, he has already discovered his divinity in childhood and standing on a 
chair proclaimed himself Louis the Sun King, an event recalled in anecdote 
by his miniature court with rapturous nods and smiles. 

Once Meredith has described the conditions of her education, it is just as 
difficult to blame Clara Middleton for allowing herself to become engaged 
to Willoughby, rather than send him packing the moment he appeared. 
Clara is hemmed in by the circumstances of her meager education, her in- 
nocence, her economic impotence, and her conditioning to docility and re- 
spectability. The last item, a tribal policing technique, held the most terror 
for a marriageable young woman and was the dragon which the sexual 
revolution had first to slay. If Clara breaks her engagement it will be a 
major scandal; if she fails to do so it will be— as she finally comes to realize— 
a catastrophe. Meredith's great interest is in psychological conflict, bind and 
double bind, the war of motive within the individual, the welter of destruc- 
tive urges, the fears and frustrations due to artificial codes and the accep 
tance of false standards of values. 

He is an avowed feminist who sees in women an oppressed class dominated 
through male self-interest, prevented from developing as human beings 
by a system which prostitutes them in and out of marriage and deliberately 
miseducates them. Clara Middleton, the product of such a learning process, 
cannot at first comprehend what it is in her rich and handsome fiance that 
she finds so utterly repellent. Her senses revolt at his peremptory embraces, 
but she cannot immediately fathom why. The discussion of volition and sex- 
uality which Hardy bungles so in frigid Sue is far better done in The Egoist. 
Meredith is sensitive not only to what one might call "timing," but also to 
the fact that sexual freedom is freedom of choice and occasion, and he recog- 
nizes that Clara feels her own will coerced in Willoughby's clumsy assertive 
advances. Sexuality is an affair of possession with this young lord and Clara 
has learned in an instant that she is to be "claimed" as "his apparent 
right." 170 She reacts like any creature who senses captivity and springs 
back, but this never ruffles Willoughby's confidence, for he regards it as only 
proper his wife be cold; it is a sign she is appropriately "pure." Virginity is 
also part of the bargain. When Clara loses her purse, Meredith plays on the 
double entendre in Willoughby's satisfaction that his former servant Flitch 
has returned it "intact"; on the same occasion the master refers to one of his 
cast off women as "an ancient purse." 

Clara is to be sold to this connoisseur by a bookish father who is humbled 
at the princely price Willoughby has condescended to pay. At a moment 
when things are not going smoothly and it seems the prize might escape 
him, Willoughby sits up over an exquisite port with her parent. "Ladies are 
creation's glory but they are an anti-climax, following a wine of a century 
old." 171 The suitor then presents his bribe— there are fifty dozen bottles of 

"o ihid., p. 49. 

"1 IWd., p. 161. 



THE SEXUAL RESOLUTION 



137 



the same port for Middleton when he becomes father-in-law to this magnif- 
icent cellar. "I have but a girl to give," blushes the old gourmand. 172 The 
bargain is struck. "Note the superiority of wine over Venus," the old scholar 
chuckles while trolling the more rakish passages of Catullus and exclaiming 
over the manner in which Willoughby's bottles are corked, a series of sexual 
pens which Meredith brings off with remarkable flair. 

Willoughby is Clara's education. Having come to perceive Willoughby's 
irremediable fatuity, Clara can serve as a tutor to Laetitia Dale, curing this 
sentimentalist of her doglike devotion to a man who had trifled with her for 
ten years, holding her always as a sort of reserve love-force on days when it 
seemed nothing better might turn up. Of Willoughby's treatment of Laetitia, 
Meredith comments in mock-sententiousness: "In the hundred and fourth 
chapter of the thirteenth volume of the Book of Egotism, it is written: Pos- 
session without obligation to the object possessed approaches felicity." 173 

One of the most delicious moments in the book occurs upon Willoughby's 
return from a trip abroad: 

Willoughby returned to his England after an absence of three years. On a fair 
April moming, the last of the month, he drove along his park palings, and 
by the luck of things, Laetitia was the first of his friends whom he met. She 
was crossing from field to field with a bank of school-children, gathering wild 
flowers for the morrow May-day. He sprang to the ground and seized her hand. 
"Laetitia Dale!" he said. He panted. "Your name is sweet English music! And 
you are well?" The anxious question permitted him to read deeply in her eyes. 
He found the man he sought there, squeezed him passionately, and let him 
go, saying, "I could not have prayed for a lovelier home-scene to welcome 
me . . ." 17 < 

Meredith is an expert at satirizing the enormous bulk of egotism that mas- 
culine chivalrous sentiment had injected into love, Romantic or Courtly. Wil- 
loughby, who finds society a "weltering human mass" 175 without feminine 
"virtue" intends by that chivalric desideratum an eternal fidelity to a mas- 
culine proprietor : 

Clara! to dedicate your life to our love! Never one touch! one thought, not a 
dream! Could you?— it agonizes me to imagine ... be inviolate? mine above? 
—mine before all men, though I am gone— true to my dust. Tell me. Give me 
that assurance. True to my name!— Oh! I hear them "His relict." Buzzing about 
Lady Patterne. "Tbe widow." If you knew their talk of widows! Shut your 
ears my angel! Consent; gratify me; swear it. Say, "Beyond death." Whisper it. 
I ask for nothing more. Women think the husband's grave breaks the bond, 

172 Ifcid., p. 159. 
*™ !!,«*., p. io 8. 
17,4 Ibid., pp. 23-24. 
"S Ibid., p. 44. 



tMm 




'38 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



cuts the tie, sets them loose. They wed the flesh-pah! What I call on is nobility 
the transcendent nobiiity of faithfulness beyond death. "His widow!" let then! 
say; a saint in widowhood. 176 

Willougbby's gallant professions of protection are in fact nothing but an 
odious form of patronization: "Whenever the little brain is in doubt, per- 
plexed, undecided, which course to adopt, she will come to me, will she 
not." 177 

So imperturbable is Willoughby that when Clara warns him, "I fear we do 
not often agree, Willoughby," he replies with irritating assurance, "When 
you are a little older!" 178 

The great wellspring of their quarrel concerns what the couple both refer 
to as "the world." For his part, Willoughby "wanted her simply to be material 
in his hands for him to mold her, he had no other thought." 170 There is a 
hitch in the scheme: "he had made the discovery that their minds differed on 
one or mo points and a difference of view in his bride was obnoxious to his 
repose." 18 * Willoughby, who intends to go into Parliament and in the days 
of the British Empire at its zenith proposes to rule that entity he calls the 
world, insists that for true lovers there should be an absolute exclusion of the 
world from their blisses. Translated, this means that the dyadic withdrawal 
he pretends to recommend for both parties should apply exclusively to his 
bride; he intends Clara to spend the rest of her days in his home catering to 
his comfort. It is Ruskin's irrepressible formula of separate spheres once again. 
Clara begins to view the prospect as tantamount to undergoing interment 
alive, 

Willoughby is a lord. To marry him is to enter into the hierarchal obliga- 
tions of feudalism. From his birth he has been taught and encouraged to 
command and he expects to continue when Clara is added to his retinue. 
When she finally gathers courage to reject him, he refuses to release her from 
an engagement she informs him in the most lucid terms is unpalatable. How 
dare she wish to be free of him: "Volatile, unworthy, liberty-my dearest! 
... you are at liberty within the law, like all good women; I shall control 
and direct your volatility; and your sense of worthiness must be re-established 
when we are more intimate; it is timidity. The sense of unworthiness is a 
guarantee of worthiness ensuing." 181 

So obtuse is Willoughby that it takes Clara four hundred more pages to per- 
suade him that she truly means not to marry him. The situation of a vain 
man who refuses to be refused in marriage by a spirited young woman, is a 

178 Ibid., pp. 42-43. 
177 Ibid., p. 88. 
"8 Ibid., p. 83. 
™Ibid., p. 39. 
"« Ibid., pp. 38-39. 
1*1 Ibid., p. 89. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION i 39 

fine subject for comedy, and Meredith milks it for all it is worth. The result 
js very entertaining. Yet the conclusion of the book, a falling into the slender 
stuff of drawing-room comedy, overheard conversations, mistaken identity 
and so forth, is— for all its hilarity— somehow disappointing. Clara is married 
off to Vernon Whitford, a nice enough fellow, and the reader is expected to 
feel that her fate is happily seeded. This hardly seems satisfactory. It would be 
a splendid thing if the bitter generality of sexual politics were all to be 
solved in marrying the right person, and the sexual revolution confined to 
and completed by a honeymoon in Switzerland. The "world" is a bit more 
complex than this and one cannot help wishing, like Clara, that there were a 
bit more of it in the book. Comedies are always concluded in marriage, but 
there is something poignant in the realization that Clara's marriage is rather 
like a death. Throughout the novel she was a person in the process of becom- 
ing, but by the last page she has not succeeded in becoming anyone but Mrs. 
Vernon Whitford, which is to say, no one at all. Meredith knows how to 
save her from the egoist, but he can think of nothing else to do for her. A 
life more occupied and interesting than mere mating— for good or ill— never 
seems to have occurred to him in connection with an intelligent young 
woman. This is a notably deficient and a rather tritely masculine at- 
titude; for all his good intentions regarding the crippling character of femi- 
nine education, the feudal character of patriarchal marriage, and the egotism 
of male assumptions, Meredith appears incapable of transcending them and 
consequendy mistakes the liberating turmoil of the sexual revolution for the 
mundane activities of a matchmaking bureau. 

So far we have observed the sexual revolution as it was reflected in the 
minds of male writers responding to it with gallant enthusiasm or dubious 
ambiguity. But the period did provide something more informative than this; 
it permitted the first expression of a feminine point of view. Mill had re- 
marked that most of what women produced when they began to write was 
but sycophancy to male attitude and ego: the caveat is profoundly true 
both then and now. Yet, inasmuch as the first phase made possible the emer- 
gence of a truly feminine sensibility, one can find in the Brontes the real 
thing. "Living in sin," George Eliot lived the revolution as well perhaps, but 
she did not write of it. She is stuck with the Ruskinian service ethic and the 
pervasive Victorian fantasy of the good woman who goes down into Samaria 
and rescues the fallen man— nurse, guide, mother, adjunct of the race. Doro- 
thea's predicament in MiddlemaTch is an eloquent plea that a fine mind be 
allowed an occupation; but it goes no farther than petition. She marries Will 
Ladislaw and can expect no more of life than the discovery of a good com- 
panion whom she can serve as secretary. Virginia Woolf glorified two house- 
wives, Mrs. Dalloway and Mrs. Ramsay, recorded the suicidal misery of 
Rhoda in The Waves without ever explaining its causes, and was argumen- 
tative yet somehow unsuccessful, perhaps because unconvinced, in conveying 



Mi 



i ill 

1 J. 


it 



I 



J 40 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



the frustrations of the woman artist in Lily Briscoe. Only in A Room of One's 
Chvn, essay rather than fiction, could she describe what she knew. 

Lucy Snowe, the heroine of Charlotte Bronte's Villette, 182 a book too sub- 
versive to be popular, is another matter. In Lucy one may perceive what 
effects her life in a male-supremacist society has upon the psyche of a woman. 
She is bitter and she is honest; a neurotic revolutionary full of conflict, back- 
sliding, anger, terrible self-doubt, and an unconquerable determination to 
win through. She is a pair of eyes watching society; weighing, ridiculing, 
judging. A piece of furniture whom no one notices, Lucy sees everything 
and reports, cynically, compassionately, truthfully, analytically. She is no 
one, because she lacks any trait that might render her visible: beauty, money, 
conformity. Only a superb mind imperfectly developed and a soul so omniv- 
orously large it casts every other character into the shadows, she is the 
great exception, the rest only the great mediocre rule. 

Lucy is a woman who has watched men and can tell you what they are 
as seen by the woman they fail to notice. Some are like John Graham Bret- 
ton, charming egoists. Their beauty, for Bronte is perhaps the first woman 
who ever admitted in print that women find men beautiful, amazes and 
hurts her. Bretton is two people: one is Graham the treasured and privileged 
man-child seen through the eyes of a slighted sister, whether the distant idola- 
tor be Lucy or Missy Home. Bronte" keeps breaking people into two parts so 
we can see their divided and conflicting emotions; Missy is the worshipful 
sister, Lucy the envious one. Together they represent the situation of the 
girl in the family. Bretton is both the spoiled son Graham, and the successful 
doctor John, and in both roles Lucy envies, loves and hates him. Never does 
the situation permit her to love him in peace, nor him to take notice of her 
in any but the most tepid and patronizing good humor: sterile, indifferent. 
His beauty and goodness make him lovable; his privilege and egotism make 
him hateful. The enormous deprivation of her existence causes Lucy to 
resemble a ghetto child peering up at a Harvard man— envy, admiration, 
resentment and dislike; yet with a tremendous urge to love— if it were pos- 
sible to love one so removed, so diffident, so oppressive, so rich, disdainful 
and unjustly superior in place. 

If the male is not the delightful and infuriating egoist whom maturity 
means learning to relinquish one's "crush" on, he is the male one encounters 
a bit later in life when one tries to make one's way. He is Paul Emanuel, 
the voice of piety, conventionality, male supremacy, callow chauvinism ter- 
rified of female "competition." John is unconquerable; he will never acknowl- 
edge any woman who is not beautiful or rich, his only qualifications; he 
loved Fanshawe's stupidity just as readily as Paulina Mary's virtue. Women 

182 Charlotte Bronte, Villette, first published in 1853 under the pseudonym Currer 
Bell. Reprinted by the Gresham Publishing Company, London, undated. Page numbers 
refer to this edition. Throughout my remarks I am indebted to an unpublished essay 
on Charlotte Bronte's Shirley written by Laurie Stone. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



141 



are decorative objects to him. Paul is easier to cope with; in his sexual an- 
tagonism there is something more tractable. John Graham never saw Lucy; 
Paul sees her and hates her. Here it is possible to establish contact and, as 
the story is all a fantasy of success (a type of success utterly impossible to 
achieve in Bronte's period, and so necessarily fantastic) Paul is met and 
persuaded. To his sneer that she is ignorant and women are dolts, Lucy 
replies with phenomenal intellectual effort. Despite the impossible atmos- 
phere he gives off as a pedagogue, the bullying, the captivity in overheated 
rooms, the endless spying, the bowdlerizing of her texts— she learns. It is his 
ridicule that forces her to achieve, pokes her into development, deprives her 
of the somnolence of ladyhood, its small ambitions, timidity, and self-doubt. 

Lucy watches women— again from a double and even more complicated 
point of vantage. She studies Ginevra Fanshawe the flirt, an idiot beauty 
callously using men to acquire what she has been carefully taught to want: 
admiration, money, the petty power of dominating a puppy. Fanshawe is 
beautiful too, and Lucy, in every respect the product of her society as well 
as its enemy and rebel, has been schooled to love this beauty. It stirs her. 
The book is full of references to the desire such beauty arouses in her. To 
express it, Bronte invents the device of an afternoon of amateur theatrics. 
Lucy is dragged into them at the last moment to play Fanshawe's lover. It 
is another of Paul's bullying schemes (be locks her in an attic in the July 
heat to be sure she Ieams her lines) to coerce her into courage and achieve- 
ment. Lucy succeeds miraculously, and she makes love to Fanshawe on stage 
in one of the most indecorous scenes one may come upon in the entire Vic- 
torian novel. (Bronte is too much an insurrectionary to acknowledge any 
convention beyond the literary and the most astonishing things occur con- 
tinuously in her fiction.) Just as maturity and success lie in outgrowing an 
infatuation with Graham's masculine egotism, or Paul's bullying but produc- 
tive chauvinism, they are also a matter of renouncing a masculine lust for 
Fanshawe. She is too dumb to love, too silly to want or to permit oneself 
to be wounded by. The dialogue between the two young women is brutal; 
Fanshawe parades her beauty with the double purpose of making Lucy capitu- 
late before it, acknowledge herself an ugly woman and therefore inferior; 
or propose herself a suitor to it and therefore a captive through desire. For 
Ginevra knows critical Lucy would be the best catch of all, the biggest con- 
quest. Lucy holds her own in these cruel sessions and won't be had either 
way. Ultimately, she transcends them and Fanshawe altogether, who fades 
into the mere butterfly she is and disappears from the book. 

The other women Lucy watches are Madame Beck and Mrs. Bretton. 
Both are older women, one a mother, one a businesswoman and head of a 
school. They are two of the most efficient women one can meet anywhere in 
fiction. Lucy, who, like Charlotte Bronte, lacked a mother, regards older 
women as the embodiment of competence, and what she loves in them is 
their brilliant ability to manage. While Victorian masculine fantasy saw only 




M i| 

¦fll- 



142 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



tender, quivering incapacity in such women, Lucy perceives them as big, 
capable ships and herself only a little boat. But the big ships are afloat be- 
cause they knew how to compromise; Lucy does not plan to. The big ships 
are convention. For all the playful banter of her relationship with her son, 
Mrs. Bretton stands for a stale and selfless maternity, bent on living vicar- 
iously through her adored boy's success. Pleasant matron that she is, she 
would sacrifice any daughter in the world for the comfort of his lordly 
breakfast, and Lucy knows it. Mrs. Bretton's conventional motherhood is 
only the warm perfection of chauvinist sentiment. Then there is Madame 
Beck, a tower of convention, the tireless functionary of European sexual in- 
hibition, watching every move of the young women under her Jehovah- 
like and unsleeping surveillance; getting up at night to examine Lucy's 
underwear, reading her letters to sniff out traces of sex in them, watching 
for missives thrown from windows to her pupils. Both these women are still 
young and ripe for sexuality. Mrs, Bretton fulfills her own in flirtation with 
her son: 

"Mamma, I'm in a dangerous way." 

"As if that interested me," said Mrs. Bretton. 

"Alas! the cruelty of my lot!" responded her son, "Never man had a more 
unsentimental mother than mine; she never seems to think that such a calamity 
can befall her as a daughter-in-law." 

"If I don't, it is not for want of having that same calamity held over my 
head; you have threatened me with it for the last ten years, 'Mamma, I am 
going to be married soon!' was the cry before you were well out of jackets." 

"But mother, one of these days it will be realized. All of a sudden, when you 
think you are most secure, I shall go forth like Jacob or Esau, or any other 
patriarch, and take me a wife, perhaps of these which are of the daughters of 
the land." 

"At your peril, John Graham! that is all." 183 

Beck is more sensually alive and would be delighted to take on John 
Graham, but of course she is not sufficiently young, beautiful, or socially 
prominent for his tastes. Real as her own sexuality is, she will gracefully 
acknowledge his rejection, and serenely carry on the business, while cheer- 
fully stamping out the intrusion of the least hint of sex in any corner of her 
establishment. As the educator of young females, Madame Beck is a per- 
petual policewoman, a virtual forewoman of patriarchal society. No system 
of subjection could operate for two seconds without its collaborators, and 
Beck is a splendid example of the breed. 

Finally, there is Paulina Mary, the golden one, the perfect woman, John 
Graham's pretty Polly, the apple of her daddy's eye. Lucy had no father 
to dote upon her, nor any John to court her, and she is painfully aware that 

183 Ibid., p. 193. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



143 



Paulina is lucky. Yet there is one flaw in this female paragon— she is a child 
of eight— delightful when she appears as Missy Home at the beginning of the 
hook; clever, affectionate, precocious— but nauseating when she reappears as 
a woman of nineteen and still a mental infant. Paulina is well-meaning 
and well loved. Even Lucy is fond of her from time to time, but she is also 
appalled that society's perfect woman must be a cute preadolescent. Having 
surveyed the lot, Lucy prefers to be like none of them. Looking over all the 
"role models" her world presents, the adoring mother, the efficient prison 
matron, the merciless flirt, the baby-goddess, Lucy, whose most genuine trial 
is that she has been bom into a world where there are no adequate figures 
to imitate so that she is forced to grope her way alone, a pioneer without 
precedents, turns her back on the bunch of them. Better to go back to some- 
thing solidly her own— deal with mathematics, Paul Emanuel, and the job. 

Lucy has watched men look at women, has studied the image of woman 
in her culture. There is probably nothing so subversive in the book as that 
afternoon in the Brussels museum when she scrutinizes the two faces of 
woman whom the male has fashioned, one for his entertainment, one for her 
instruction: Rubens' Cleopatra and the Academician's four pictures of the 
virtuous female. Lucy's deliberately philistine account of Cleopatra is very 
entertaining: 

It represented a woman, considerably larger, I thought, than the life. I cal- 
culated that this lady, put into a scale of magnitude suitable for the reception 
of a commodity of bulk, would infallibly rum from fourteen to sixteen stones. 
She was indeed extremely well fed. Very much butchers' meat, to say nothing 
of bread, vegetables, and liquids, must she have consumed to attain that breadth 
and height, that wealth of muscle, that affluence of flesh. She lay half-reclined 
on a couch, why, it would be difficult to say; broad daylight blazed round 
hec; she appeared in hearty health, strong enough to do the work of two 
plain cooks; she could not plead a weak spine; she ought to have been standing, 
or at least sitting bolt upright. She had no business to lounge away the noon 
on a sofa . . , Then, for the wretched untidiness surrounding her, there could 
be no excuse. Pots and pans, perhaps I ought to say vases and goblets, were 
rolled here and there on the foreground; a perfect rubbish of flowers was 
mixed amongst them, and an absurd and disorderly mass of certain upholstery 
smothered the couch, and cumbered the floor. 184 

This "coarse and preposterous canvas," this "enormous piece of claptrap," as 
Lucy nominates the masturbatory fantasy she perceives in it, is the male 
dream of an open and panting odalisque, the sheer carnality floating always 
in the back of his mind, and can be matched only by its obverse— the image 
of woman he would foist on the woman herself. Cleopatra is for masculine 
delectation only, and when Paul catches Lucy contemplating the painting 
he is deeply shocked: "How dare you, a young person, sit coolly down, with 
1E *Ifc><J., p. 183. 



Yka 



144 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



the self-possession of a gatcon, and look at that picture?" 185 A despot, as 
Lucy describes him so often, he is deeply offended, even affronted, that a 
young woman should see what he immediately settles down to gaze at. Paul 
forbids Lucy to look upon Cleopatra, and forces her to sit in a dull comer 
and study several mawkish daubs the conventional mind has designed for 
her: 

. . . a set of four, denominated in the catalogue, "La vie d' une femme." They 
were painted in a remarkable style, flat, dead, pale and formal. The first repre- 
sented a "Jeune Fille," coming out of a church door, a missal in her hand, 
her dress very prim, her eyes cast down, her mouth pursed up— the image of 
a most villainous, little, precocious she-hypocrite. The second, a "Mariee" with 
a long white veil, kneeling at a prie-dieu in her chamber, holding her hands 
plastered together, finger to finger, and showing the whites of her eyes in the 
most exasperating manner. The third, a "Jeune Mere" hanging disconsolate over 
a clayey and puffy baby with a face like an unwholesome full moon. The 
fourth, a "Veuve," being a black woman, holding by the hand a black little 
girl [black because in mourning] and the twain studiously surveying an elegant 
French monument . . . All these Four "Anges" were grim and grey as burglars, 
and cold and vapid as ghosts. What women to live with! insecure, ill-humored, 
bloodless, brainless nonentities! As bad in their way as the indolent gipsy giantess, 
the Cleopatra, in hers. 186 

In this comic instance of sight taboo, the social schizophrenia within mascu- 
line culture, not only the hypocrisy of the double standard, but its purpose 
and intentions are exposed. It has converted one woman into sex symbol, flesh 
devoid of mentality or personality, "cunt"— this for itself to gaze upon. And 
unto woman herself is reserved the wearisome piety of academic icons with 
their frank propaganda of serviceable humility. 

The disparity in the contradiction of images represented by the two pic- 
tures explains the techniques of Villette better than any other moment in 
the novel. It is a division in the culture which Bronte is retorting to by 
splitting her people in half and dividing Lucy's own responses into a fluctu- 
ating negative and positive. The other dichotomy is between her newness, 
her revolutionary spirit, and the residue of the old ways which infects her 
soul. This inner conflict is complemented by an exterior one between her 
ambitions and desires and the near impossibility of their fulfillment. There 
are obstacles everywhere, social and financial. The hard realities of the sexual 
caste system frustrate her as well as its mentality. Curiously enough, the 
obstacles drive her on. Lucy represents not only Bronte's, but what must 
have been, and probably still remains, the ambition of every conscious young 
woman in the world. She wants to be free; she is mad to escape, to leam, to 
work, to go places. She envies every man his occupation, John his medicine, 

183 IW„ p. 184. 
186 Ibid.., p. ,85. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



i45 



Paul his scholarship, just as she envied them their education. Both had the 
finest obtainable and it was given to them as a preparation for life. Lucy was 
given nothing so substantial: 

, . . picture me for the next eight years, as a bark slumbering through halcyon 
weather, in a harbour as still as glass— the steersman stretched on the little deck, 
his face up to heaven, his eyes closed ... A great many women and girls are 
supposed to pass their lives something in that fashion; why not I with the 
rest? . . . However, it cannot be concealed that in that case, I must some- 
how have fallen overboard, or there must have been a wreck at last. 187 

She is traumatically cast out of the middle class quite unprepared to live, 
for all the world had expected her to exist parasitically. She now lacks the 
prerequisites: a face, respectable social connections, and parents to place her. 
She is a serf without a proprietor who must become a wage slave, namely a 
governess or teacher. The only way out, and it's a desperate track, is to learn 
the world and books, Villette chronicles her formal and informal education 
in the acquisition of her own competence through both. 

But what work can Lucy do; what occupations are open to her? Paid com- 
panion, infant nurse, governess, schoolteacher. As they are arranged, each is 
but another name for servant. Each involves starvation wages which only a 
lifetime of saving could ever convert to ransom. There is another humiliation 
in the fact of servant status which rested with particular severity on middle- 
class women who in taking employment are falling a step below the class of 
their birth. (While a paid companion, Lucy encounters a schoolmate now 
the mistress of a household— Lucy had been visiting another servant in the 
kitchen.) Furthermore, these occupations involve "living-in" and a twenty- 
four-hour surveillance tantamount to imprisonment. The only circumstances 
under which Lucy is permitted an occupation are such that they make fi- 
nancial independence and personal fulfillment impossible. It is not very 
hard to understand her envy at the gratification and status which Paul and 
John are given automatically in their professions. One might well ask, as Lucy 
does unceasingly, is it worth it then, under these conditions, to work? Is it 
not easier to keep falling into daydreams about prince charmings who will 
elevate one to royalty, or so they claim? At any rate, they could provide easy 
security and a social position cheaply attained. They will provide, if nothing 
else, the sexual gratification which women occupied like Lucy are utterly 
forbidden to enjoy. 

Villette reads, at times, like another debate between the opposed men- 
talities of Ruskin and Mill. Lucy is forever alternating between hankering 
after the sugared hopes of chivalric rescue, and the strenuous realism of Mill's 
analysis. Bronte demonstrates thereby that she knows what she is about. In 
her circumstances, Lucy would not be creditable if she were not continuously 

187 Ibid., p. 32. 



146 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




about to surrender to convention; if she were not by turns silly as well as 
sensible. So there are many moments when she wishes she were as pretty 
as Fanshawe, as rich as Polly, occasions when she would happily Forgo life 
itself at a sign that Graham recognizes she was alive. Born to a situation 
where she is subject to life-and-death judgments based on artificial standards 
of beauty, Lucy is subject to a compulsive mirror obsession, whereby each 
time she looks in the glass she denies her existence— she does not appear in 
the mirror. One of the most interesting cases of inferiority feelings in lit- 
erature, Lucy despises her exterior self, and can build an inner being only 
through self-hatred. Yet living in a culture which takes masochism to be a 
normal phenomenon in females, and even conditions them to enjoy it, Lucy 
faces and conquers the attractions Paul's sadism might have held. 

Charlotte Bronte has her public censor as well as her private one to deal 
with. This accounts for the deviousness of her fictional devices, her con- 
tinual flirtation with the bogs of sentimentality which period feeling man- 
dates she sink in though she be damned if she will. Every Victorian novel is 
expected to end in a happy marriage; those written by women are required 
to, Bronte pretends to compromise; convention is appeased by the pasteboard 
wedding of Paulina Mary and Prince John; cheated in Lucy's escape. 

Escape is all over the book; Villette reads like one long meditation on a 
prison break, Lucy will not marry Paul even after the tyrant has softened. 
He has been her jailer all through the novel, but the sly and crafty captive 
in Lucy is bent on evading him anyway. She plays tame, learns all he has 
to teach her of the secrets of the establishment— its mathematics and Latin 
and self-confidence. She plays pupil to a man who hates and fears intelligent 
women and boasts of having caused the only woman teacher whose learning 
ever challenged his own to lose her job. Lucy endures the baiting about the 
"natural inferiority of females" with which Paul tortures her all through the 
lesson, and understands that only the outer surface of his bigotry melts when 
she proves a good student and thereby flatters his pedagogic vanity. Yet in his 
simplicity he has been hoodwinked into giving her the keys. The moment 
they are in her hand, and she has beguiled him into lending her money, rent- 
ing her a school of her own, and facilitated her daring in slipping from the 
claws of Madame Beck— she's gone. The keeper turned kind must be eluded 
anyway; Paul turned lover is drowned. 

Lucy is free. Free is alone; given a choice between 'love" in its most agree- 
able contemporary manifestation, and freedom, Lucy chose to retain the in- 
dividualist humanity she had shored up, even at the expense of sexuality. The 
sentimental reader is also free to call Lucy "warped," but Charlotte Bronte is 
hard-minded enough to know that there was no man in Lucy's society with 
whom she could have lived and still been free. On those occasions when 
Bronte did marry off her heroines, the happy end is so fraudulent, the mar- 
riages so hollow, they read like satire, or cynical tracts against love itself. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



147 



There was, in Lucy's position, just as in the Brontes' own, no other solution 
available. 

As there is no remedy to sexual politics in marriage, Lucy very logically 
doesn't marry. But it is also impossible for a Victorian novel to recommend a 
woman not marry. So Paul suffers a quiet sea burial. Had Brontes heroine 
"adjusted" herself to society, compromised, and gone under, we should never 
have heard from her. Had Bronte herself not grown up in a house of half-mad 
sisters with a domestic tyrant for father, no "prospects," as marital security 
was referred to, and with only the confines of governessing and celibacy 
staring at her from the future, her chief release the group fantasy of 
"Angria," that collective dream these strange siblings played all their lives, 
composing stories about a never-never land where women could rule, exercise 
power, govern the state, declare night and day, death and life— then we 
would never have heard from Charlotte either. 1S8 Had that been the case, 
we might never have known what a resurrected soul wished to tell upon 
emerging from several millennia of subordination. Literary criticism of the 
Bronte's has been a long game of masculine prejudice wherein the player 
either proves they can't write and are hopeless primitives, whereupon the 
critic sets himself up like a schoolmaster to edit their stuff and point out 
where they went wrong, or converts them into case histories from the wilds, 
occasionally prefacing his moves with a few pseudo-sympathetic remarks 
about the windy house on the moors, or old maidhood, following with an at- 
tack on every truth the novels contain, waged by anxious pedants who fear 
Charlotte might "castrate" them or Emily "unman" them with her passion. 
There is bitterness and anger in Villette— and rightly so. One finds a good 
deal of it in Richard Wright's Black Boy, too. To label it neurotic is to mis- 
take symptom for cause in the hope of protecting oneself from what could 
be upsetting. 

What should surprise us is not Lucy's wry annoyance, but her affection 
and compassion— even her wit. Villette is one of the wittier novels in English 
and one of the rare witty books in an age which specialized in sentimental 
comedy. What is most satisfying of all is the astonishing degree of conscious- 
ness one finds in the work, the justice of its analysis, the fairness of its obser- 
vations, the generous degree of self-criticism. Although occasionally flawed 
with mawkish nonsense (there is a creditable amount of Victorian syrup 
in Villette"), it is nevertheless one of the most interesting books of the period 
and, as an expression of revolutionary sensibility, a work of some importance. 

Mill and Engels dealt with the sexual revolution on a theoretical and 
rational level; Hardy, Meredith, and Bronte described it in fiction with less 
objectivity but with the informative addition of the conflicts it involved and 
the emotions it awakened; the poets respond on still another, often uncon- 

188 See Fannie Ratchford, The Brontes' Web of Childhood (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1941). 



148 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



¦M -i 



scious level. What one finds in the poetry of the Victorian period is often a 
disguised arrangement of what is the most inhibited and negative material 
in the age— its ambivalence, its uncertainty, its guilt. It is reacting less to 
practical sexual politics than to the promise— and threat— of sexual freedom. 
Victorian poetry is in general the vehicle of the period's grave misgivings on 
three subjects: the death, disappearance or erosion of God through the prog- 
ress of the sciences, both social (history, anthropology, economics) and nat- 
ural (biology, geology, archaeology); democracy and the possibility of class 
warfare; and that affront to the ancient pieties and hated restraints which 
the sexual revolution represented. The poetry of the period responded to 
these contemporary tempests by being not of the period at all, but of a dif- 
ferent age. Only under the disguise of medieval or ancient situations did the 
poets feel safe enough to cope. Arnold revived the pastoral to describe the 
grief of a shaken religious disposition; Tennyson the romance, in order to 
inhabit a feudal asylum where he could deal with the failure of marriage 
and the wearying perils of sexuality. 

Medievalism and the securely remote flavor of courtly love seemed the best 
setting for this sort of discussion. Actually, it was Keats who started it all 
with that fatal woman in La Belle Dame Sans Merci who kept her knight 
hanging about disconsolate and "palely loitering." 188 Such a posture of las- 
situde was attractive to Tennyson, and he adopted it becomingly in Tithonus 
and The Lotus Eaters. It is probably more natural to him than the bootstrap 
determination of Ulysses. Throughout his poetic career, Tennyson appears to 
be tom between a vivid appreciation of the good woman of chivalrous senti- 
ment (the buxom matron or virginal adolescent), and the fatal woman. 
They are neatly categorized under the era's elaborate conventional floral 
imagery of Lily and Rose. Tennyson's early lyrics describe the fortunes of 
Shalott and Mariana, imprisoned high-born maidens full of sensibility and 
melting with sexual frustration— Lilies. Though it has a lily maid upon the 
scene as well, his major poem, The Idylls of the King, introduced the Rose 
element in two different manifestations of that temptation: Guinevere and 
Vivian. The subversive sexuality of the first brings down the entire Utopian 
dream of the Round Table. Tennyson's ideal kingdom based on ideal mar- 
riage, the union of soul and sense, male and female, a Victorian synthesis of 
opposites, is a resounding failure. Arthur is all soul, a pure disembodied spirit, 
a Christ figure. Guinevere appears to be irredeemably human and is there- 
fore classed as pure sensuality. Yet for all that, she has some dignity and is 
probably Tennyson's best female character. Vivian, who renders Merlin help- 
less and so hastens the ruin of Arthur's kingdom and Tennyson's ideal state, 
is another matter. She is carnality unrelieved by a single sympathetic trait; 
a vaginal trap, a vagina dentata, a snakelike presence whose every cell is 
another bit of guile. In Tennyson's adherence to the separate spheres' dogma, 

189 Any discussion of the fatal woman must, of necessity, owe a debt to Mario Praz's, 
The Romantic Agony (Oxford, 1933). 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



149 



the male is given over to intellect, rule, warfare and other altruistic projects 
calculated to serve mankind and promote civilization, but the female, as 
Vivian obligingly confesses, knows only the animal level of sexuality: 

"Man dreams of fame while woman wakes to love." 
Yea! love, tho' love were of the grossest, carves 
A portion from the solid present, eats 
And uses, careless of the rest; but fame 
The fame that follows death is nothing to us; 190 

At times this insatiable female appetite may be decorated with motherhood 
and called the "rose of womanhood" as in Tfie Two Voices, a very early poem, 
but in the Idylls, his most mature production, Tennyson has occasion to see 
below this into the chasm of chaotic, uninhibited copulation which Vivian 
the Abstract Female presages; a world where if such as she takes any equal 
part can only roll "back into the beast." 

All this rabid lechery may appear particularly unlikely as one remembers 
the inhibited sexuality of the actual Victorian woman. The poets, however, 
did not deal in practicalities but in fantasy, and their fantasies were their 
own, and therefore masculine. 191 Recognizing her for the polluted creature 
Tennyson knows her to be, Merlin mutters "harlot." Like any witch, Vivian 
responds to the magic of a name with her hideous true colors: 

Leapt from her session on his lap, and stood as 
Stiff as a viper frozen; loathesome sight, 
How from the rosy lips of life and love 
Flash'd the bare-grinning skeleton of death! 182 

Tennyson had very mixed emotions about Lilies and Roses; was tempted 
and repulsed alternately. Lilies are creatures forced into dull, vicarious ex- 
istence like Shalott, or hopelessly fed upon shadows like the Lily Maid of 
Astolat, or they suffer endless hallucinatory attendance upon sexual affirma- 
tion like Mariana. Delicate and poetic sensibilities as they are, they have a 
poor time of it until they starve and die. Their virginity is their only life, 
their curse and mortality as well. Roses, their sensual opposites (outside of 
the Bronte's no woman is a complete human being in the period, surely the 
most damning thing one can say about its sexual culture) also pose a terrible 
threat, particularly depressing to a poet as diffident and tepid toward the 
prospect of active sexuality as Tennyson. The problem is never resolved in 
his work, which is a virtue, for it creates tension and interest. Despite his 
moral objections to them, it is clear that Tennyson is not just negative but un- 

190 Tennyson, The Idylls of the King, "Merlin and Vivian," 11. 458-62. 

191 For some glimpses of female sexual fantasy in the Victorian period, the reader is 
recommended to Christina Rosserri's Goblin Market. 

"2 The Idylls of the King, "Merlin and Vivian," II. 843-46. 



150 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



decided about the Rose type. Yet there is something discouraging about both 
floral patterns: to be a Lily is to be condemned to die; to be a Rose is to be 
fatal to others; it would be difficult to find a more uncongenial way to sum 
up sexuality or the other sex. 

The conflict continued with Rossetti who made a valiant effort to heal 
the disparity between sexuality and sensibility in the synthesis of The House 
of Life, a brave but not very successful attempt to unite masculine idealism 
(Courdy and Platonic) with a rich sensuality, more admirable for its inten- 
tion than its achievement. Elsewhere Rossetti also indulges in fantasies of 
feminine sexuality, but with fewer reservations, less inhibiting restraint. The 
Blessed Damozel is a bid to eroticize Christian Platonism, not only via the 
warm, naked breast the damozel generously exposes to the bar of heaven, but 
in the even more ambitious notion that when the lovers of the poem are re- 
united in Dante Gabriel's worldly paradise, they will be encouraged to prac- 
tice their ardor, naked and unashamed before the eyes of the Blessed Virgin. 
Contemporary critics find the impropriety of all this more in their own hearts 
than in Rossetti's; but it is undeniable that he has embarked on an impos- 
sible mission. Jenny, his finest poem, is the dramatic monologue of a prosti- 
tute's client seeing, or trying to see, through the double standard and sexual 
politics to justice and the social and economic circumstances of Jenny's fate, 
The poem is so subtle and sophisticated in technique, so ironic in the hermetic 
perfection of its only speaker, that one never knows, or perhaps Rossetti 
never has to divulge, whether it is the inherent evil in the world, "a toad 
within a stone," or simply the way things have been arranged by fellows 
like our monologist, that is finally accountable for Jenny's degradation. Un- 
affected by the usual Victorian melodrama and mawkishness when dealing 
with such a subject, Jenny is in the best analytical and rational vein of the 
novelists. The majority of Rossetti's lyrics are not, and their chief contribu- 
tion is to convert the fatal woman into a symbol such as The Card Dealer, 
or the bosomy Helen of Troy Town, abstract icons of death and fate. This 
distancing device will be useful for later poets like Swinburne and Wilde, as 
it makes Tennysonian moral scruples irrelevant and permits the poet to enjoy 
the fatal woman undisturbed. 

Tennyson preserved propriety by castigating the wanton Rose with vice 
and always pronouncing loudly for the Lily; Rossetti kept a shred of 
decorum by clinging to the notion of the Virgin, or Beatrice, or some other 
Lily, however secularized. Swinburne went all the way and pronounced 
loudly for the evil itself. In the course of his devotions to Dolores, "Our Lady 
of Pain," he begs this pagan princess to "Forgive us our virtues," "We" would 
change "the lilies and languors of virtue/For the raptures and roses of Vice." 
It is at moments like this that Swinburne most reminds one of a prurient 
schoolboy jerking off. 

The earlier Victorian poets had dealt with the onsurge of doubt and ag- 
nosticism by turning sadly to the Christian middle ages; Swinburne, with a 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



151 




logical and forthright courage one cannot help but admire, went right across 
the line into atheism. Since this was far too risky even for him to do in modern 
dress, he generally hunted about for some vaguely plausible classical setting. 
Among the ancients it might just be conceivable for dramatic characters to 
refer to the deity as "The supreme evil, God," even if the speakers are the 
chorus of Athenian maidens in Atafonta. Since its introduction in the Renais- 
sance, classicism has always represented a certain competitive or seductive 
danger to Christianity, but in Swinburne its use is a deliberate piece of sabo- 
tage. A self-conscious immoralist, he initiated a classical revival flagrantly 
based on a reversion to primitivism, and a certain calculated savagery, rich in 
overtones of the Marquis de Sade. 

In fact, all the pagan terror Tennyson built into Albion and set up the 
reign of Arthur to restrain, Swinburne released in the flood of uninhibited 
sexuality which Tennyson had set himself to withstand. The lid, as it were, 
began to loosen in Tennyson; Swinburne gaily, irresponsibly, encouraged it 
to pop. The latter poet's unfortunate sexual peculiarities are well known: 
his impotence, his algolagnia— that incorrigible craving to be whipped— the 
cultural masochism he had imbibed at England's finest school over the birch- 
ing block of Eton. All the enormity of these sad diversions are well docu- 
mented in Swinburne's unpublished or happily forgotten verses. 103 Edmund 
Wilson informed us that Swinburne's fixation is one of the clues to the age 
and its sexual culture, a culture that forced its elite to identify pain and 
unsatisfied homosexuality with its earliest sexual experiences. 194 It is some- 
how logical after a long period of sexual repression, when sexual energy fi- 
nally finds means of release and its pent-up dynamism discovers an avenue of 
egress, it may take rather devious routes into neurosis, perversity, and other 
antisocial forms of sexuality. Swinburne is such a case and the era of fin de 
sie'ele, which he opened with the publication of his Poems and Ballads in 
1866, represents something analogous for a whole society. Swinburne's case is 
instructive; a failed rebel, he was not content to renounce established religion 
but had to become a militant atheist and finally indulge in a counterreligion 
of paganism and masochistic ritual; an exponent of sexual freedom, he was 
compelled to carry it to license and childish frenzy; a patrician republican, 
he was not satisfied until he had gone full circle and become an Imperial 
Tory babbling jingoism in his old age. 

There is something impractical, irrational, sudden, incoherent about the 
sexual liberation of fin de si&cle, as if the surge of long-damned sexual energy 
became a flood that somehow overwhelmed its initiators so that they were 
incapable of distinguishing any values save those of untrammeled expression 

193 See Georges LaFourcade, Swinburne: A Literary Biography (London: Bell, 1932} 
and La Jeunesse de Swinburne (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1928), Also Chastelard, The 
Qiteen Mother, Whippingham Papers, etc. 

104 Edmund Wilson, "Swinburne of Capheaton and Eton," a critical introduction to 
the Novels of A. C. Swinburne (New York: Noonday P re ss, 1963). 



\m 



15* 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



—at whatever cost to themselves. And the deliberately outrageous profes- 
sions of its participants, Swinburne in particular, had something of panic in 
them, and a great deal of unresolved guilt. The source of this guilt lies un- 
mistakably in his formative years, and the unhealthy conditions of a restric- 
tive culture. The reprisals which surprised convention took upon Wilde must 
also command our sympathy. Yet the very disorganized character of fin de 
siecle sexuality has about it a fairly certain hazard to the sexual revolution and 
carries within it the inevitable threat of reaction. The very abruptness of the 
release predicts a faltering later; the uncertainty of its unpremeditated rush 
forbodes its arrest. 

Wilde's Salome was published in French in 1893. Ibsen's A Doll's House 
was written in Norwegian in 1879, but not performed in English until 1889. 
There is an irony in the fact that Wilde's play followed Ibsen's on the Eng- 
lish scene by only four years. To the new theatre and its revolutionary natu- 
ralist manifesto in that real and contemporary slam of Nora's door, contrast 
Wilde's perfumed fantasy based on a Near Eastern myth. A Doll's House 
represented the actuality of the sexual revolution. Fin de siecle replied with 
the weary irrelevance of an unconscious dream, based on self-induced fright 
and titillation. Interesting and neglected work that it is, and key to so much 
that came after it, Salome always seems remarkably contingent in the very 
midst of the sexual revolution, somehow oblique and aside from the point. 

It is a dialogue between sensuality and asceticism: Salome and Jokanaan— 
an awesome but extremely unpleasant version of John the Baptist. Both an- 
tagonists are artists; Salome does pagan aestheticism, Jokanaan prophetic 
fervor; her style is the lyric and the dance, his is rhetoric, denunciation, and 
rhapsody. But the style of the play itself is Salome's, and it is Salome who 
wins the duel, though it be a Pyrrhic victory. Following Swinburne's lead, 
Wilde casts his vote for the fatal woman Tennyson earnestly resisted, even 
commending in Salome" that "castrating" female whom masculine fantasy in- 
vented and by now had grown to approve; the Bitch of Mailer's hostile imag- 
ination turned into a goddess. Salome is presented as a blinding manifesta- 
tion of sexuality itself, more an idea than a personality, the success of the 
play depending on the actress who plays her. For all the languorous and pow- 
erful sensuality of the character and the speeches, it is an imperious sexual 
¦will which Salome represents, rather than sexuality. Nothing so passive as 
a vaginal trap, she is an irresistible force and is supposed to betoken an in- 
satiable clitoral demand that has never encountered resistance to its whims 
before. Every man in Herod's court palpably desires her, from the king to 
the lowest guard. Only Jokanaan disdains her, declining with the fixed 
convictions of an immovable object. No mere vampire or seductress, like 
Vivian and earlier fatal ladies, Salome is a despot, something of a rapist. And 
it is not poor old impotent Merlin whom she makes her demands upon, but 
patently virile and hairy young Jokanaan, the holy prophet of God. Rossetti 
held on to the hope of gently eroticizing Christianity; Swinburne wrote 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



153 



tracts against it; it is Wilde's shameless intention to titillate it with the dance 
of the seven veils and Salome's wonderfully explicit come-on-a series of 
statements so forthright one had not heard their like since the Wife of Bath: 

I am amorous of thy body Jokanaan. Thy body is white as the lilies of a field 
that the mower hath mowed. . . . Suffer me to touch thy body. 195 

Jokanaan responds with an enviable awareness of his sanctitude: 

Back daughter of Sodom! Touch me not. Profane not the temple of the Lord 
God. 198 

While a young Syrian, infatuated with desire for her, looks on and then 
stabs himself out of jealousy and frustration, Salome croons to the Baptist: 

It is thy mouth that I desire, Jokanaan. Thy mouth is like a band of scarlet 
on a tower of ivory. It is like a pomegranate cut in twain by a knife of ivory 
There is nothing in the world so red as thy mouth . . . Suffer me to kiss 
thy mouth. 

Jokanaan: Never! Daughter of Babylon! Daughter of Sodom! Never. 
Salome: 1 will kiss thy mouth, Jokanaan. I will kiss thy mouth. 197 

Jokanaan, who sounds more like Doc Hines (the sex fanatic and evangeli- 
cal puritan in Faulkner's Light in August) than anything one might encoun- 
ter in the New Testament, answers this with the repelled horror of an Or- 
thodox Jew tempted by the "stranger woman": 

Back! Daughter of Babylon! By woman came evil into the world. Speak not 
to me. I will not listen to thee. I listen but to the voice of the Lord God. 198 

He is also supposed to represent the asceticism of the early Christian era, 
the fascinated denunciatory antisexuality of the Dissenter mentality, while 
serving as a mouthpiece for appalled respectability when confronted with 
the nudity of Beardsley's bare-breasted dancer. 

For all her exhibitionism and imperious clitoral command, Salome is 
not exclusively or even fundamentally female; she is Oscar Wilde too. The 
play is a drama of homosexual guilt and rejection followed by a double re- 
venge. Salom6 repays the prophet's rebuttal by demanding his head, and then, 
in Wilde's uneasy vision of retribution, Salome is slain by Herod's guards. 

195 Oscar Wilde, Salome, translated into English by Wilde and Alfred Douglas, re- 
printed in The Portable Oscar Wilde, edited by Richard Aldington (New York: Viking 
Press, 1946), p. 403. 

™> Ibid., -p. 404. 

™ Ibid. 

198 ft^., p. 403 . 



I'fcj 



154 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



The brazen sexuality Salome represents, is, in the play's last moment, pun- 
ished with terrible force as the despicable tyrant Herod turns on the stairs, 
beholds Salome in an ecstasy kissing the dismembered head of Jokanaan, 
and calls out the climactic last line: "Kill that woman!" 169 

Despite the stunning virtuosity of this ultimate volte face, it appears 
to have something arbitrary about it unless we comprehend the play's dis- 
guised and therefore elusive homosexual imagery. It is Herod's command that 
slays Salom6, but Herod is a corrupt authority in a corrupt state. Were Wilde 
to suffer such condemnation, he might assuage his own guilt, but he would, 
like Salome, still emerge as the heroine of the play. Yet the order was issued 
before and came from the mouth of the desirable prophet: 

The Voice of Jokanaan: Let the captains of the host pierce her with their 
swords, let them crush her beneath their shields. 200 

In vain will Salome" appeal to the bloody head she is now free to kiss: 

Well, thou hast seen thy God, Jokanaan, but me, me, thou didst never see. 
If thou hadst seen me thou hadst loved me. I saw thee, and I loved thee. Oh, 
how I loved thee! I love thee yet, Jokanaan, I love only thee . . . I am athirst 
for thy beauty; I am hungry for thy body; and neither wine nor apples can 
appease my desire. What shall I do now, Jokanaan? Neither the floods nor the 
great waters can quench my passion, I was a princess, and thou didst scom 
me. I was a virgin, and thou didst take my virginity from me. I was chaste, 
and thou didst fill my veins with fire. . . . Ah! Ah! wherefore didst thou not 
look at me? If thou hadst looked at me thou hadst loved me. Well I know 
that thou wouldst have loved me, and the mystery of love is greater than the 
mystery of death. 201 

Jokanaan will never forgive her, never desire her. The kiss she courted, the 
ivory knife cutting the pomegranate, the scarlet band on a tower of ivory- 
all are images of anal penetration or fellatio. And to the stern voice of 
Judaeo-Christian interdiction to ask this kiss is to castrate or murder the be- 
loved. Should he comply, convention calls him effeminate; should he refuse, 
the hurt pride of desire takes its vengeance in psychic murder, here ren- 
dered in the convenient rubric of the myth as decapitation, followed with 
imaginary suicide or execution. In the stem court of Herod's corrupt justice 
the whole scenario when completed is punishable by swift and arbitrary 
death. Yet even here there is satisfaction— the death comes by Jokanaan's 
order, and it is a death of crushing and penetration under an army of males: 
one thinks of Genet. As with Swinburne, so here, guilt will find ways of sat- 
isfying itself in pain, punishment, and condemnation. And Salami is a secret 

199 Ibid,, p. 429. 

wo Ibid., p. 414. 
mibid., p. 418. 



THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION 



155 




dream of guilt rather than an open act of rebellion in the clear daylight of 
action. 

In creating a fatal woman who castrates the male with what seems to he 
the full favor of the author's approval (for whatever the deus ex ending may 
mean, Salom6 carries the play, every word of its ornate Near Eastern exoti- 
cism, its jewels and peacocks, a tribute to the sensuality she stands for), Wilde 
would appear to be reacting to the sexual revolution with the enthusiasm 
of overkill. The feminists merely wanted equality and the vote— need one 
respond with a heroine who goes about cutting off heads? Indeed, Salome 
resembles nothing so little as the actual Victorian woman of her time. But 
then she is not a woman anyway, but the product of Wilde's homosexual 
guilt and desire. This consideration, together with the practical obstacle that 
he could not contemplate even a closet drama where one male made love to 
another, necessitated subterfuge. Victorian pornography and other under- 
ground or unpublished works went a good deal further. But Wilde wanted 
to publish and to shine. Dorian Gray is also disguised homosexuality and just 
misses being the first important homosexual novel because it is too timid to 
tell us what Dorian's "crime" really was and so must lean upon the frum- 
mery of "vice"— those plastic whorehouses and opium dens we are asked to 
believe were his downfall. The substitution spoils the book, whose flirtatious 
first chapter is very good indeed. 

And so, unable to say what he liked, because of historical and personal 
reasons of fear and guilt, Wilde had to resort to myth, the oriental mime of 
an imitation Noh play, the picturesque inspiration of Dore's and Gustav 
Moreau's paintings, presenting us with a fatal woman who is not even a 
female. The revolutionary energy of Wilde's assertion of homosexuality, 
which sheer circumstance years later forced him to enact in the martyrdom of 
his trial and imprisonment, is, in his writing itself, diverted into reactionary 
fantasy 202 which still parades the fatal woman of misogynous myth, the 
feminine evil. Ibsen's Nora Helmer is the true insurrectionary of the sexual 
revolution; Salom6 a retreat into archaic slanderous accusation, that sym- 
bolic emptiness which predicts the counterrevolution. It was personal neces- 
sity which led Wilde to traffic in symbols and to refuse to deal with the actual 
woman responding to her circumstances, a product of history and condition- 
ing struggling to free herself from both. In writers who followed him the 
resort of depicting woman as an idea, an abstraction, had other motivations. 
Yet a whole series of symbolic and unreal feminine avatars succeeded Salom^ : 
Yeats' notion of genteel elegance, Eliot's fear of life, everyone's Eternal Femi- 
nine, Earth Mother, Castrator, or whatever. 

Both A Doll's House and Salome are confrontation drama, where action 
is unnecessary and plot an impertinence because all interest is hypnotized 
into awaiting the explosion. Nora confronted every convention and the chiv- 

208 In the writing published in Wilde's lifetime, rather than the unexpurgated De 
Profundus, finally released in 1959. 



Ill 



1 5 6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



alrous masculine prejudice that caged her within a child's toy structure, 
hoping to insure she would remain a house pet and infant there forever. 
Salome, standing in for Wilde, confronted the frowning British public which 
penalized "unnatural acts" with years in prison and still kept a Scots law on 
the books which made sodomy punishable by hanging. He also confronted 
the rejection of the men he would court. And by this one does not 
impugn the powers of Wilde's sexual attractiveness. The two most debilitat- 
ing homosexual fears— both the direct product of society's hostility— are fear 
of public exposure, and fear of rejection. The first fear produced the spec- 
tacle of Salome's "drag" — those naked breasts her alter ego hides behind. The 
second produced Jokanaan's refusal, which accounts for the play's only 
motivation. Whatever the sex of the "heroine," Salome is a breathtaking 
evocation of desire on the stage; all of its ringing tension a function of its 
public display. Whatever the enormity of Salome's revenge, there is actual 
pathos in her pain at being scorned. Wilde managed this so well we react 
not just to her carnality, nor even to her attempts to coerce. And Jokanaan's 
adamantine rebuff has something of arrogance and much of twisted puri- 
tanism in it. 

Perhaps what was hardest of all for Wilde to confront was not even this 
rejection but the appalling and dizzying accusation of the direst kind of Sin, 
the sin of all others against which both convention and "manliness" had set 
their faces, the sin against which the entire Judaeo-Christian ages cried out 
"Sodom!" Nora was battling the sexual politic openly and rationally. Wilde 
was not able to. He could dare only a brief demonstration; then came con- 
dign sentence and silence. When Wilde fell in 1895, Nora and her band of 
revolutionaries had a few more years of insurrection left; Shaw and Woolf 
and the vote were yet to come. Wilde had broken even stronger patriarchal 
taboo, and the punishment was swift and terrible. It took somewhat longer 
for patriarchy to respond to the greater threat which Nora represented and 
to which it could at first reply with the concession of mild reforms. But here, 
too, reaction came; slowly, powerfully, the great impetus of the sexual rev- 
olution was brought to a halt. 



FOUR 



The Qounterrevolution 
1930-60 



REACTIONARY POLICY 
The Models of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union 

The first phase ended in reform rather than revolution. For a sexual 
revolution to proceed further it would have required a truly radical social 
transformation— the alteration of marriage and the family as they had been 
known throughout history. Without such radical change it remained impos- 
sible to eradicate those evils attendant upon these institutions which re- 
formers found most offensive: the economic disabilities of women, the double 
standard, prostitution, venereal disease, coercive marital unions, and involun- 
tary parenthood. A completed sexual revolution would have entailed, even 
necessitated, the end of the patriarchal order through the abolition of its 
ideology as it functions through a differential socialization of the sexes 
in the areas of status, temperament, and role. While patriarchal ideology was 
eroded and patriarchy reformed, the essential patriarchal social order re- 
mained. As most people could conceive of no other form of social organiza- 
tion, the only alternative to its perpetuation appeared to be chaos. In the 
words of one recent analysis, it was not so much that "social order required 



II 



1 5 8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



the subordination of women: rather, to the conservatives it required a family 
structure that involved the subordination of women." 1 

It seemed, finally, that patriarchy was necessary for the family system. In 
conservative economies with an ethos of aggressive competition, the "home" 
seemed to offer the last vestiges of humane feeling, the only haven of com- 
munal emotion. For a society unwilling to extend such activity beyond the 
nuclear family (open to criticism both on the grounds of its self-centered 
character and as a wasteful and inefficient body) 2 there was nothing left 
but to salvage the private hearth. As an educational arm of the state, the pa- 
triarchal family has much to recommend it. Heads of families may be sub- 
jects, perhaps even something like vassals, to the state, while members of 
such families are subject or vassal to their head. Authoritarian governments 
appear to favor patriarchy especially; the atmosphere of fascist states and 
of dictatorships depends heavily upon their patriarchal character. 3 Another 
form of totalitarianism, such as that which occurred in the Soviet Union, be- 
gan to flourish about the same time as the sexual revolution, inaugurated there 
on a large scale, began to be abandoned. 4 As the patriarchal family depends 

1 Aileen Kraditor, Up From the Pedestal, Selected Writings in the History of Ameri- 
can Feminism (Chicago, Quadrangle Books, 1968) p. 13. In our analysis emphasis has 
been put upon the persistence of the family as a force frustrating revolutionary change. 
Other factors less basic undoubtedly contributed: the collapse of organized feminism in 
19ZO, the Depression, and the death of radicalism in the thirties, postwar reaction after 
1945— and the labor situation which accompanied it, and finally, the general conservatism 
of the fifties. The hypothesis that the counterrevolution began to show signs of abatement 
after i960 is attested to by the recent revival of feminism. 

2 Not only is woman's contribution to the larger society generally precluded by the 
nuclear family, her full-time employment in menial domestic tasks is wasteful both to 
herself and to society, and the traditional method of child care (from which her atten- 
tion is continuously diverted by household tasks) carried on in an unsystematic and in- 
dividualistic manner, is also inefficient. 

s Marcuse, Horkheimer, and other thinkers have pointed this out. Reich puts it well: 
"The authoritarian state has a representative in every family, the father, in this way 
he becomes the state's most valuable tool." "Since authoritarian society reproduces it- 
self in the structure of the mass individual by means of the authoritarian family, it fol- 
lows that political reaction must defend the authoritarian family as the basis of the 
slate, of culture and of civilization." Wilhelm Reich, Tfie Mass Psychology of Fascism 
0933) translated by Theodore Wolfe (New York: Orgone Institute, 1946), pp. 44 
and 88. 

4 The problem of the relation of the family to state control is a difficult one. The 
Mtiller-Lyer theory, which Bertrand Russell recapitulates as supposing that "where the 
state is strong the family is weak and the position of women is good, whereas where 
the state is weak the family is strong and the position of women is bad" does not appear 
to operate with strong states such as Fascist Germany, Spain, and Italy or even mili- 
tarist Japan, where a strong state operated either by exploiting, fostering, or even re- 
establishing an extreme patriarchal family structure. In this case the co-operation of males 
with the state may be obtained by the confirmation or even reintroduction of their au- 
thority over females. See Bertrand Russell, "Style in Ethics," The Nation 118:197-99 
(1924). 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



159 



for its cohesiveness primarily on the economic dependence of women and chil- 
dren, financial equality is almost impossible within it, and its unity is rooted 
in its economic and legal entity rather than upon its exclusively emotional 
ties. Finally, and what is most germane, is that even the modem nuclear 
family, with its unchanged and traditional division of roles, necessitates male 
supremacy by preserving specifically human endeavor for the male alone, 
while confining the female to menial labor and compulsory child care. Dif- 
ferences in status according to sex follow inevitably. 

In two very different societies, Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia, official 
governmental experimentation with the family furnishes something like a 
model that might clarify the problems other societies faced in the sexual 
revolution. The National Socialist Party in Germany drew its first and most 
consistent support from a group of disgruntled war veterans. Its mood was 
the national, sexual, and racial chauvinism one would expect from such a 
political base. Historians and sociologists have described the Nazi state as a 
return to tribal solidarity, playing stipulated in-groups against out-groups. 5 
Beyond this, it was also probably the most deliberate attempt ever made to 
revive and solidify extreme patriarchal conditions. Led by their Fiihrer, tribal 
members themselves would play master to members of the tribal cells, the 
women, and children. 

From the first, National Socialism saw the sexual revolution and feminism 
as forces to be dealt with seriously. The Woman's Movement had begun late 
in Germany. Not until the first decade of the twentieth century had it made 
any inroads there. But five years before the Nazi party came to power fem- 
inism had organized some millions of German women into a huge federation 
of women's organizations in four great divisions. By 1928, when the great 
women's federation was formed, feminism was in fact a fortress. Nazism 

B Joseph K. Folsom, The Family and Democratic Society (New York, John Wiley, 
1934, 1943)- Folsom describes the Nazi state as showing "strong trends backward to- 
ward a caste society and authoritarianism." (p. 193). Clifford Kirkpatrick, Nazi Germany, 
Its Women and Family Life (Indianapolis: Bobbs Merrill, 1938). Kirkpatrick speaks of a 
". . . general readiness for primitive thinking, reliance on force and authority and a 
regression, if possible, to a narrow intimacy in living, thrusting roots into a native soil, 
stress on blood ties, unanimity of opinion, love of friend and hatred of foe." P. 28. 

8 Feminism began with Helene Lange's pioneering efforts for the school reforms of 
1908. Other early German feminists were Alice Salomon, Marie Baum and Marie Eliza- 
beth Liiders. Women were enfranchised under the Weimar Constitution and won seats 
in the Reichstag. Gertrud Baumer, the leader of German feminism was a member of the 
Reichstag and a high official in the Ministry of the Interior; she was purged from public 
life when the Nazis came to power. Yet the Weimar reforms had not really altered, or 
at least not struck hard enough, even at the legal surface of German patriarchy. One 
finds ample proof of the very tenuous character of woman's new freedom in the fact 
that the Burgerlicb.es Gesetzbuch or civil code continued to authorize male authority in 
the husband in the matter of residence, power of decision and control in most economic 
areas and over the children. (This was not repealed until 1957O 



i6o 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



set about storming it in a very methodical way: by factionalizing, by infil- 
trating, by forcing elections, commandeering leadership positions, purging 
feminist leaders both from the movement and from public life, and then 
pre-empting the feminist organizations into the Nazi folds under the orders 
of the Party in organs such as the Frauenorden, the Frauenschaft, and later 
the Frauenfront (renamed the Frauenwerk a few years later), ostensibly 
headed by a Fuhrerin and anti-feminist women collaborators, but controlled 
by men close to the party such as Krummacher and Hilgenfeldt. Although 
only 3 per cent of party members were women, the takeover of women's 
groups had proceeded so skillfully that in 1933 National Socialist women's 
organizations were now the in-group and feminists the out-group. T 

When the process of "bringing into line" (Gleichshaltung) was accom- 
plished and the older women's organizations, often not only feminist, but 
pacificist, internationalist, and socialist, were co-opted, often at enormous 
cost, what the Nazis inherited in the case of the two most powerful of the 
four groups, the Federation of German Women's Clubs and the League of 
University Women, was merely a name. The first group and the teachers' 
branch of the second had voted themselves into dissolution during 1933 
rather than be absorbed. Nevertheless, some six to eight million women were 
mobilized for Party ends in the Frauenwerk, ready to be put at the service of 
the Nazi state. 

7 Party instructions for taking over the feminist organizations stipulate: "The bringing- 
in-line" [Gleichshaltung] of the women's organizations does not mean a deviation from 
the dear line of National Socialism . . . Fill the other women's organizations with the 
National Socialism spirit ... In social work the most important places in the country 
as well as the city must he occupied . . . The executive bodies of the other women's 
associations are to be slowly penetrated . . . The religious groups are to be handled with 
caution. They cannot be brought into line in the same way as the other women's clubs. 
Detailed instructions will appear shortly." Later orders were specific as to tactics: "In 
every province a woman commissioner who must be a National Socialist will be appointed 
by the province leader . . . The commissioner . . . shall cause the women's organiza- 
tions themselves to accept a newly chosen leadership. Only when the organization re- 
fuses to accept the new staff does the commissioner take over this office. Severity in 
this connection is to be avoided if possible." Discipline within the new order was strict; 
"The leaders of the National Socialist Frauenschaft warn that no unsocial behavior may 
take place in other associations. In case such should take place the woman commis- 
sioner of the German Frauenschaft is to be given the facts. The commissioner for the 
province shall act in association with the German Frauenfront to restrain forbidden 
activity." Amtswaherinnenblatt der N. S. Frauenschaft (Deutscher Frauenorden) Mun- 
chen, Gassier Nos. 14, p. 43 (May 21, 1933), 15, p. 51 (June 7, 1933) and 23, pp. 
181-82 (Oct. 1, 1933). Here, as in all of the quotations from Nazi sources (save 
those from Hitler's Mem Kampf, readilv available in translation) appearing in this sec- 
tion, I am indebted to Clifford Kirkpatrick's invaluable study which supplied translations 
on pp. 60, 61, 64, 50, 246, 52, 109, 1 10, 1 1 1-12, 1 12-13, 1 M, 116-17. 1 : 8. My remarks 
on Germany are further indebted to Reich's Must Psychology of Fascism, Folsom's com- 
parison of Germany, Russia, and Sweden in The Family in Democratic Society, and 
Walter Laquer's Young Germany, Robert Brady's The Spirit and Structure of German 
Fascism, and Max Seydewjtz's Civil Life in Wartime Germany. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



161 



The part women were assigned to play in Hitler's Germany was to be 
one strictly confined to utter dedication to motherhood and the family, 8 
and yet (here there is perhaps less inherent contradiction than one might 
suppose) women were to make up the factory population which serviced 
and produced the German war machine, at least at the outset, and until 
their numbers were augmented with slave labor from Eastern Europe. By 
1935 the National Labor Service Law of July 26 obliged members of both 
sexes to participate in state labor, which by 1940, few women could escape. 
For all the thundering propaganda about marriage, holy motherhood and 
home, the number of employed women, even working mothers, increased 
under Nazi rule from 1933 onward. 9 This in itself is hardly surprising, for 
the population of women employees all over the world increased during this 
period, and one would expect such an increase following upon the opening 
of higher education to women. But in Nazi Germany, a government de- 
cree 10 stipulated that women be held to a quota of one in ten university 
students; women constituted only one third of high school students. This is 

8 The emphasis on loyal motherhood was based on the sound assumption that na- 
tionalist emotion is largely imbibed in early childhood through parental influence. Moth- 
erhood was used as a lever with which to organize women into the Nazi controlled 
women's clubs. A Party worker looking over prospective members categorizes them: "A 
part are Marxist, today still tense, inflamed, embittered [e.g., militant feminists]. But 
it is false to go ahead from the standpoint of classification . . . According to my expe- 
rience there is only one way, to speak as woman to woman, as mother to mother. We 
come to our point of view by the way of Christianity. God be praised! . . . National 
Socialism is more difficult to make comprehensible since every woman has a bit of 
pacifism in her. The national will indeed grows in women through the men. One thing 
we can do. Teach women to rear their children to love the homeland. So if we cultivate 
the will to sacrifice in every German woman, they will be ready, albeit with heavy 
hearts, to give that which is most dear for the Fatherland." Amtswaherinnenblatt der 
N. S. Frauenschaft (Deutscher Frauenorden) Miinchen, Gassier, No. 15, p. 62 (June 

7. 1933). 

9 When Hitler came to power (January 1933) women were 37.3% of all workers 
employed in industry. By 1936 their share was reduced to 31,8%. But in 1940 it was 
back up to 37.1%. And in absolute numbers, the female labor force rose from 4,700,000 
in 1933 to 6,300,000 in 1938 and 8,420,000 in January 1941. The total estimated 
number of women fit for work was then set at 10-12 million and there was continual 
discussion of how to mobilize those women still unemployed: figures from Franz Neu- 
man, Behemoth, The Structure and Practice of National Socialism 1933-44 (New York: 
Oxford, 1942, 44). By the end of 1943 as many as 13.5 to 14 million women had been 
conscripted into work. Helge Press points out that the number of women in paid posi- 
tions during World War I was greater than that during World War II in Germany. 
Helge Press "West Germany" in Patai, Woman in the Modern World (New York, Free 
Press, 1967) p. 259. Folsom, op. cit., reports that while the percentage of women em- 
ployed in 1933-36 declined (more men became employed after the depression) in actual 
numbers, women employed increased by 1,200,000 even during this period, the three 
years the Nazis were trying hardest to get women out of the labor market that their jobs 
might be given to men. 

10 The decree was put in effect in 1933, rescinded in 1935. But it seems to have had 
its effect, for the quota of university women was still just 10% in 1938. 



Iff 



\l. 


: ! 






i 


1 


1 
I 1 


1 



162 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



a far ]ovver ratio than one would have expected in view of the rapid strides 
of feminism in Germany; it is far lower than in England and America. 
What does make Germany unique among Western states at this period was 
its reversal of the feminist thrust into the professions and the higher economic 
and social positions. The actual purpose of Nazi ideology was not, as stated, 
to return women to the home, but to "take women out of professions and 
put them into low-paid occupations." 11 Speaking at a meeting of the Nazi 
medical panel in December 1934, Dr. Wagner, the appointed leader of the 
medical profession, cried out before a mixed audience, "We will strangle 
higher education for women." 12 The dissenting feminist voices still heard 
within the new order were silenced one by one, Dr. Thimm, Anna Pappritz, 
and Sophie Rogge-Borner. When the new regime had taken over, German 
women were forbidden to sit as judges; in 1936 they were forbidden to hold 
office in the courts. There were thirty women in the Reichstag when the 
Nazis came to power; they were apparently not "the right kind," for by 1938 
there were none. One gathers some insight into Nazi emotions below the 
chivalrous eulogies of motherhood in the jeer which a National Socialist 
member called out to a Social Democrat who regretted the death of her 
son in World War I: "For that you she-goats were made." 13 

As in the case of the Jews (why persecute your finest talents?) the Nazi 
method with women was hardly practical. It would have been far more 
expedient for a nation about to embark on years of military exploit, empire 
and colonization, to have declared sexual equality and provided day care 
centers for the rise in birth rate it demanded to fill the colonies and perpet- 
uate its glorious race. Then, even if it were not sufficiently pragmatic to 
enroll the female population in the mighty army of the thousand-year Reich 
(Hitler had made it clear from the start that the Nazis desired "no women 
to throw grenades") it would still be sure of having a replica society at home 
to run the state in the absence of its warriors. A nation which plans to 
mobilize nearly all of its male population into the army is surely in need 
of a corps of women doctors, lawyers, judges, and other functionaries. 

One may find economic reasons for the exclusion of women from partici- 
pation in higher level work in the hypothesis that the Nazis may have felt 
the need for that cheap labor force which all other twentieth-century states 
have enjoyed from women's employment; and as long as it reserved military 
service for males alone it could hardly staff the munitions plants with men. 
Yet this would not account for the plethora of propaganda for motherhood 
and the home, which must be explained as an effort to purge women from 
the upper levels of the labor force (which in fact was done on a large 
scale, through legislation against "double income families," and the flat 

n FoIsom, op. cit., p. 195. 

12 Dr. L. Thimm, "Leisrungsprinzip oder 'Neider mit den Frauen,' " Die Xrztin Vol. 
10, No. 1, pp. 3-4 and 28 (January 1934). 

13 Gebrkc, Martha Marie, "Fraenwahl," Vossische Zeitung, July 26, 1932. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



163 



firing of married and unmarried women alike) so that when they were called 
back into the labor market, women would accept the humble status of 
server and helper which had been decreed for them as auxiliary to the great 
masculine project of the state. For all the pontiflcation on "feminine" and 
"womanly work" (social work, nursing, teaching) the arduous labor required 
of German women was in the factories and the fields of the Nazi state. 

The policy of Dr. Wilhelm Frick, 14 Minister of the Interior, was very 
concise, both as to ideology and economics: 

The mother should be able to devote herself entirely to her children and her 
family, the wife to the husband. The unmarried girl should be dependent only 
upon such occupations as correspond to the feminine type of being. As for the 
rest, employment should remain given over to the man. 

While the German male could be kept loyal and content by receiving those 
positions from which women were dismissed in large numbers during the 
first Nazi years, he would also be willing to enter the army when the "war 
effort" expanded, while the female, properly cowed as to her worth and 
place, was made to do the growing labor of the Reich. 

Yet the most basic motivations behind the Nazi manipulation of its female 
subjects were neither economic (related to male unemployment) nor dic- 
tated by population policy (related to imperialist expansion). The final 
reasons for the male supremacist temperament of the Nazi state are psycholog- 
ical and emotional, a policy line clarified by the pronouncements of the Party 
authorities themselves. Gottfried Feder, one of the Party's founding "thinkers" 
defined feminism for the masses: 

The Jew has stolen woman from us through the forms of sex democracy. We, 
the youth, must march out to kill the dragon so that we may again attain the 
most holy thing in the world, the woman as maid and servant. 16 

In a coy, inadvertent tribute to Ruskin, a Nazi woman leader, Guida Diehl, 
suggested "queen" be added to the list. 16 In his Nuremberg speech of Sep- 
tember 8, 1934, Hitler himself corroborated the theory that Jewish Com- 
munism, an alien and Semitic outrage, was the source of the detested sexual 
revolution: 

The message of woman's emancipation is a message discovered solely by the 
Jewish intellect and its content is stamped with the same spirit. 17 

14 Wilhelm Frick, "Die Deutsche Frau im nationalsozialisrischen Staate," Volkischer 
Beohachter, June 12, 1934. 

15 Gottfried Feder, quoted in "Die Deutsche Frau im Dritten Reich," ReichstagslwT- 
respondenz der Bayrischen Volkspartei, April 4, 1932. 

18 Guida Diehl, Die Deutsche Vrau und der Natioruilsozialismits, 2nd. rev. ed., Eise- 
nach, Neuland, 1933, pp. 114-20. 

17 Adolf Hitler, quoted in N. S, Fravenbuch, Munchen, J. F. Lehmann, 1934, 
pp. 10- 11. 



llftl 



¦ \ 




164 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



The views of this remarkable personality on woman's place are very explicit. 
The conventional separation of male and female spheres occurs as naturally 
to a Hitler as to other reactionaries : 

For her world is her husband, her family, her children and her home. But 
where would the greater world be if no one cared to tend the smaller world) 
. . . We do not find it right when the woman presses into the world of the man. 
Rather we find it natural when these two worlds remain separate . . . To one 
belongs the power of feeling, the power of the soul ... to the other belongs the 
strength of vision, the strength of hardness . . . The man upholds the nation 
as the woman upholds the family. The equal rights of women consist in the 
fact that in the realm of life determined for her by nature she experience the 
high esteem that is her due. Woman and man represent two quite different 
types of being. Reason is dominant in man. He searches, analyses and often 
opens new immeasurable realms. But all things that he approaches merely by 
reason are subject to change. Feeling in contrast is much more stable than 
reason and woman is the feeling and therefore the stable element. 18 

In Mein Kampf Hitler had stated that "the German girl is a State Subject 
and only becomes a State Citizen when she marries." 10 The original Nazi 
program called for abolition of women's suffrage and when the regime came 
to power the franchise, granted by Weimar as early as 19 18, was limited, for 
the exclusion of women from public life and office was Nazi policy. There 
is a brood-mare theory of women implicit in all Nazi pronouncements and 
Hitler's statement in Mein Kam-pf that the "aim of feminine education is 
invariably to be the future mother" 20 has a special irony when one remem- 
bers how closely linked is population growth with the ambitions of a military 
state; more children must be bom to die for country. And as Reich points 
out in The Mass Psychology of Fascism, and Mein Kampf illustrates again 
and again, the mystical idealization of chaste motherhood is a particularly 
efficient means not only of utterly equating sexuality with procreation (facili- 
tated by the Nazi ban on contraception and abortion) but also of suppress- 
ing and inhibiting female sexuality altogether and converting it into a state- 
directed process of human reproduction for what were often lethal state 
ends. 

As Germany had come under attack both by the international feminist 
movement and the liberal West for its treatment of women, Hitler defended 
the new state against the charge that "we have instituted a tyrannical regi- 
mentation of women": 

The outside world says, "Yes, the men! But the women they cannot be optimis- 
tic with you. They are oppressed, downtrodden and enslaved. You do not 

18 Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, translated by Chamberlain et al. (New York, Reynal 
and Hitchcock, 1940), p. 659, 
20 Ibid., p. 621. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



165 



want to give them any freedom, any equality of rights." But we reply, what you 
regard as a yoke others experience as a blessing. What for one appears as heaven, 
for another is hell ... I am often told, "you want to force women out of 
professions." No, I only want to create to the greatest extent the possibility of 
founding a family and having children because our folk needs them above all 
things. 21 

The Fiihrerin Frau Scholtz-Klink concurred with a docile definition that 
the only work of the German woman is to serve the German male— "to 
minister in the home" attending to "the care of man, soul, body and mind" 
continuously "from the first to the last moment of man's existence." 22 There 
was never any question among Party notables that the Nazi idea was a purely 
masculine affair, which women might serve but never partake of. As Min- 
ister of Propaganda, Goebbels made this clear: 

The National Socialist movement is in its nature a masculine movement . . . 
The realms of directing and shaping are not hard to find in public life. To 
such realms belong for one thing the tremendously great sphere of politics. 
This sphere without qualification must be claimed by man . . . When we 
eliminate women from public life, it is not because we want to dispense with 
them but because we want to give them back their essential honor . . . The 
outstanding and highest calling of woman is always that of wife and mother, 
and it would be unthinkable misfortune if we allowed ourselves to be turned 
from this point of view. 23 

The Nazi "experiment" is particularly noteworthy in that, unlike other 
Western governments, it legislated the female sphere, rather than merely 
presenting it in the form of a biological edict, or simply propagandizing 
through a suasion often gallant in tone. For the Nazi state took a number of 
actual measures to insure the family, so often elsewhere merely the subject 
of propaganda, doubt, or wailing prophecy. The Nazi regime taxed bache- 
lors and spinsters, and on June 1, 1933, it enacted its infamous Marriage 
Loans, under which one third of all German marriages were contracted 
thereafter, with tax and interest rebates for each child bom in the mar- 
riage. In the early years of the regime the purpose of this was to remove 
women from the labor force (at the higher levels anyway) but still more 
deliberately to offset the declining birth rate which had accompanied Ger- 
man defeat in a First World War followed by the Depression, as well as to 
fight the tendency toward divorce, free union, contraception, and abortion, 
which had grown up under both the liberal Weimar climate and feminist 

21 Adolf Hitler, quoted in Die Frau, Vol 44, p- 48 S. (October 1936). 

22 Gertrud Scholtz-Klink, The German Woman (Mimeographed leaflet prepared by 
the Reichsfrauenfuhrung). 

23 Josef Goebbels, quoted in Der Nationalsozialistische Stoat (Walter Gehl, ed. 
op. cit.). 



U 



I : 



1 66 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



influence. Women took out the loan, but it was paid to the men. The wives 
created by the loan were not allowed to work unless the husband could show 
cause for welfare qualification and extreme need. The law took 800,000 
women out of the labor market in 1933-35, hut by 1936 there were already 
1,200,000 more women employed than when Hitler came to power in Janu- 
ary 1933 and their numbers kept rising with the armament efforts until the 
number of employed women was double what it had been at the start of the 
regime. 

The campaign to raise the birth Tate succeeded far better; the number of 
live births arose from 971,174 in 1933 to 1,261,273 in J 935' 24 The Nazi 
program was operated on coercion and bribery as well as propaganda: Fol- 
som contrasts this with the more democratic method Sweden pursued by 
improving housing, guaranteeing maternity leaves, etc. Governments who 
manipulate population growth have two choices: making maternity pleasant, 
or making it inescapable. Moreover, when the Nazis came to power in 1933 
there were two million women in excess of the male population, who, 
despite the force of a state inspired prescription to marry, clearly could not, 
and so continued to be victims of the endless cant about home and mother- 
hood. 

To provide contraceptive information in Nazi Germany was dangerous and 
punishable even in physicians. All the Weimar marriage clinics which had 
distributed contraceptives were closed after 1933. Contraceptive devices 
could no longer be advertised or sold save by specially licensed permit. Yet 
condoms were sold openly in vending machines in Berlin. This may appear 
utterly inconsistent. In fact it is not, for condoms were advocated, not as 
contraception, but as health measures to protect the populace and particu- 
larly the soldiery against infection by venereal disease. 25 After 1934 the Nazi 
state performed its own very different birth control in the notorious eugenic 
clinics through countless, largely indefensible, sterilizations. Sex education 
in Nazi Germany was quite simply racism, a course in Aryan eugenics. 
Abortion became a very risky affair, penalized by extreme measures, the crim- 
inal law of May 1933 making even the act of assistance in obtaining an 
abortion a penal offense. Unless there were suspicion of congenital defect, 
generally understood as non-Aryan parentage, all pregnancies must be 
brought to term. The liberal sexual reformers of the Weimar period were 
purged; Wilhelm Reich's books were banned. The Nazis found communism 
and Jewry responsible for the "sexual license" they claimed had preceded 
their regime and instituted an ethos of their own, generally neo-puritan as 
it applied to women, often neo-pagan as it applied to men. 

2 * Figures for the Marriage Loans from Kirkpatrick, op. tit., p. 149-73 and Folsom, 
op. cit., p. 195. 

"¦ r ' Syphilis was something of a private obsession with Hitler and innumerable refer- 
ences are made to it in Mein Kampf where it is repeatedly equated with sexual freedom 
or, in Hitler's view, bolshevik license. 




THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



167 



Homosexuality was vigorously denounced, and there were frequent homo- 
sexual purges in the military, despite the continued presence of Captain 
Roehm, a well-known homosexual, as leader of the storm troopers. The virility 
cult of Nazi male culture, its emphasis upon 'leaders" and male community, 
lent the entire Nazi era a curious tone of repressed homosexuality, neurot- 
ically anti-social and sadistic in character. The men's house culture of the 
Nazi Miinnerbiinde constituted something very like an instance of state- 
instituted deviance. Prostitution and pornography were both proscribed inef- 
fectively and for puritanical reasons quite removed from economic or hu- 
manitarian considerations; both became the privileges of the S.S. and other 
favored Nazi functionaries. In certain areas the police busily prohibited 
women from smoking; Dr. Krummacher issued edicts against cosmetics. 
Meanwhile the double standard flourished and prostitution, regulated and 
protected by the police, was looked upon as an indispensable convenience in 
a military state, so long as the "street picture" were not too offensive to inno- 
cent German youth. Fertility was considered so valuable that when a hus- 
band's vagary resulted in illegitimate birth, he was not held to have com- 
mitted adultery in the legal sense. Unmarried women were thought to have 
transgressed but little in presenting the state with new children, but illegiti- 
macy was not acceptable as a forgivable addition to the population in mar- 
ried women. Every aspect of Nazi sexual regulations, including its masculine 
tinge of neo-paganism, was of a character which might well be described as 
a state-sponsored and legally enforced sexual counterrevolution. 

In reviewing the Nazi state, one can only conclude that economic mo- 
tives superseded those not only of "sacred motherhood" (its favorite shib- 
boleth) but even those of bolstering the family and the home. 28 Not only 
were German women deprived of professional or political participation that 
they might be exploited in the most exhausting labor the state needed done, 
its factory and agricultural work, but the home as a tribal unit was in con- 
tinual competition with the state, which created time-consuming and com- 
pulsory organizations for each family member. 

Yet the overriding reason for the flagrantly patriarchal and male-suprema- 

26 Folsom describes its effect on the family unit as deleterious: "The Nazis have 
wanted to strengthen the family as an instrument of the State. State interest is always 
paramount. Germany does not hesitate to turn a husband against a wife or children 
against parents when political disloyalty is involved. Much of the time of children and 
youth, as well as adults, is taken from the family for the use of group activities. Courts 
may take custody of children if parents refuse to teach them the Nazi ideology." Fol- 
som, op. cit., p. 196. Kirkpatrick sums up the Nazi attempt to solve what it fancied 
to be the "woman's problem" this way: ". . . the Nazis were not willing to pay the 
price. Theirs was a halfway program. They harried a few women out of their jobs, paid 
out a little money to encourage births, distributed a vast amount of propaganda and 
went right ahead with military preparations. An opportunistic demand for women's ener- 
gies and capacities in the service of war preparations was hostile to defining woman's 
role in marriage." Kirkpatrick, op. cit., p. 284. 



fftl 



1 68 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



cist character of the Nazi state seems to be temperamental rather than po- 
litical or economic. In its regressive tribal mood a structure built on the sup- 
pression of women represented the perfect vehicle of authoritarian, jingoist, 
and militarist sentiment. ZT Again, one is forced to conclude that sexual poli- 
tics, while connected to economics and other tangibles of social organization, 
is, like racism, or certain aspects of caste, primarily an ideology, a way of 
life, with influence over every other psychological and emotional facet of ex- 
istence. It has created, therefore, a psychic structure, deeply embedded in 
our past, capable of intensification or attenuation, but one which, as yet, no 
people have succeeded in eliminating. 

The Soviet Union did make a conscious effort to terminate patriarchy and 
restructure its most basic institution— the family. After the revolution every 
possible law was passed to free individuals from the claims of the family: free 
marriage and divorce, contraception, and abortion on demand. Most material 
of all, the women and children were to be liberated from the controlling 
economic power of the husband. Under the collective system, the family 
began to disintegrate along the very lines upon which it had been built. Pa- 
triarchy began, as it were, to reverse its own processes, while society returned 
to the democratic work community which socialist authorities describe as 
matriarchy. 

On December 19, 19 17, and October 17, 1918, Lenin issued two decrees 
which invalidated the prerogatives of males over their dependents and af- 
firmed the complete right to economic, social, and sexual self-determination 
in women, declaring it a matter of course that they freely choose their own 
domicile, name, and citizenship. 28 Every legal provision was made for po- 
litical and economic equality. One cannot legislate a sexual revolution by 
fiat, however, as Lenin was aware, and efforts were made to make the 
financial independence of both women and children a reality: nurseries were 
to be established, housekeeping was to be collectivized to spare women its 

27 Abrahamsen (probably relying upon Reich's rather superior account in The Mass 
Psychology of Fascism") argues that much of the Nazis' success was due to the consistently 
high level of "patriarchalism" present in German culture. In a more recent book, Robert 
Lowie argues against this thesis. But Abrahamsen, and Reich still more, comprehend the 
formalization of authoritarian patriarchy in the Nazi state as intimately connected with 
the national mass psychology and Lowie 's depreciation of Germanic patriarchalism, on the 
grounds that motherhood was respected or that individual housewives were strong charac- 
ters, is somewhat naive. See David Abrahamsen, Men, Mind, and Power (New York, 
Columbia University Press, 1945) and Robert Lowie, Toward Understanding Germany 
(Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1 954). 

2S See Rudolph Schlesinger, The Family in the LI.S.S.R. Documents and readings 
(London, Roudedge & Kegan Paul, 1949). Illegitimacy was no longer recognized. Incest, 
adultery and homosexuality were dropped from the criminal code. On November 20, 
1920, abortion under hospital conditions was legalized. The new code of January 1, 
1927 recognized common-law marriages. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



T69 




drudgery, maternity leave would be granted, and women welcomed on an 
equal footing into the labor force, which together with education and the 
household, were to be made collective. 

With all this, the Soviet experiment failed and was abandoned. Through 
the thirties and forties Soviet society came to resemble the modified patri- 
archy of other Western countries; at times the zeal of its propaganda for the 
traditional family was indistinguishable from that of other Western nations, 
including Nazi Germany. The reasons for the counterrevolution are many 
and complex, yet a good number of conservative observers have rejoiced so 
in the event that they are willing to attribute it to nature, the "biological 
tragedy of women," the eternal life and validity of the patriarchal family 
and so forth. 28 

The chief causes appear to be the difficulty of establishing a complete 
social revolution when one is overwhelmed, as the Russians were, with both 
political (the White Russian wars against the revolution) and economic prob- 
lems (women were declared economically independent, but this scarcely made 
them so, particularly in the New Economic Policy years of unemployment). 
A still deeper cause is the fact that beyond declaring that the compulsive 
family must go, Marxist theory had failed to supply a sufficient ideological 
base for a sexual revolution, and was remarkably naive as to the historical and 
psychological strength of patriarchy. Engels had supplied nothing but a his- 
tory and economy of the patriarchal family, neglecting to investigate the 
mental habits it inculcates. Lenin admitted that the sexual revolution, like 
the social and sexual processes in general, were not adequately understood; 
he also stated on a number of occasions that he did not find them important 

2B Scholars freely admit this widespread bias: "A good deal has been written on the 
subject and many writers have concluded that the Soviet experience proves that 
the family cannot be dispensed with." H. Kent Geiger, TJie Family in Soviet Russia 
(Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1968), p. 96. An article on "The Changing 
Soviet Family," by Urie Bronfenbrenner in The Role and Status of Women in the 
Soviet Union, ed. by Donald R. Brown (New York, Teachers College, Columbia Uni- 
versity Press, t9&8) speaks of "a number of Western Scholars" who have interpreted the 
"dramatic shift in Soviet policy on the family" as "a return to and vindication of" tradi- 
tional Western family patterns (pp. 102-3) and traces this attitude to its most authori- 
tative enunciator, Alex Inkeles, who in 1949 took satisfaction in the Soviet abandonment 
of revolutionary policies as "striking affirmation of the importance" of the family in 
"Western civilization." Alex Inkeles, "Family and Church in Postwar USSR," Annals of 
the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, CCLXIII (May 1949), pp- 33- 
44. Timasheff, whose material on the Soviet family was incorporated into Bell and Vogel, 
the most authoritative American text on the subject of the family, makes it clear that 
the radical sexual policy had to be abandoned as its effects "were found to endanger the 
very stability of the new society and its capacity to stand the test of war." (This last 
phrase has a certain unintentional irony.) Nicholas Timasheff, The Great Retreat (New 
York, Dutton, 1946). In popular American opinion during the forties and fifties (cold 
war years) it was frankly believed that "since the Russians had tried and failed to 
change the family it couldn't be done." 



[y 



170 



SEXtML POLITICS 



enough to speak on. 30 Trotsky, who did not deign to treat of sex in his 
supposedly practical book Everyday Questions, is vehement about the ideolog- 
ical vacuum, Soviet failure, and Stalinist regression in The Revolution Be- 
trayed, 31 but this is the hindsight of 1936. Indeed, it seems as though Reich's 
charge that sex itself were somehow beneath the notice of the great social 
thinkers is correct. 32 Therefore, with the collapse of the old patriarchal order, 
there was no positive and coherent theory to greet the inevitable confusion. 

In addition to this, there was no realization that while every practical 
effort should be made to implement a sexual revolution, the real test would 
be in changing attitudes. For Soviet leadership had declared the family de- 
funct in a society composed entirely of family members, whose entire psychic 
processes were formed in the patriarchal family of Tsarist Russia. Women 
in such a society were loath to relinquish the dependency and security of 
the family and the domination over children which it accorded them; men 
were just as reluctant to waive their traditional prerogatives and privileges; 
everyone talked endlessly about sexual equality, but none, or few, were capa- 
ble of practicing it. Nearly all were afraid of sexual autonomy and freedom. 
Moreover, the collective was difficult, if not impossible, to establish in direct 
proportion to the strength of family feeling and organization. There were, 
moreover, several ancient errors embedded in the revolutionary mentality: a 
belief that sexuality is incompatible with social effort and dedication, an as- 
sumption that sexuality is antithetical to collective or to cultural achieve- 
ment (one finds this in Freud too), 33 an attitude in which pregnancy and 
childbirth were continually referred to as "biological infirmities," and a ques- 
tionable, even dangerously superficial, presumption that family and marriage 
are merely economic or material phenomena, capable of solution by economic 
and institutional methods alone. 

Even here the Soviets failed miserably. As Trotsky comments icily, "You 
cannot 'abolish' the family, you have to replace it." 34 The communal house- 
keeping and creches simply did not materialize. Geiger, who feels the failure 
to provide these two services was the "fatal flaw" in the revolution's effort to 
emancipate women reports that in 192.5 only three out of every one hundred 

30 K]ara Zetkin, Reminiscences of Lenin, London, 1029. Lenin to Klara Zetkin: "Per- 
haps one day I shall speak or write on these questions— but not now. Now all our time 
must be dedicated to other matters." P. 61. 

ai Leon Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed (1936), translated by Max Eastman (New 
York, Merit, 1965). 

32 Wilhelm Reich, The Sexual Revolution (1945) (New York, Noonday, 1967). 

33 A. A. Soltz, a party official, had stressed this as early as 1926, and Zalkind, the 
party officer who first mapped out the ideological line for a retreat from sexual freedom 
in developing a theory of "revolutionary sublimation" admitted to his debt to Freud. As 
leader of the conservative movement between 1923 and r936, Zalkind developed a theory 
of "conservation of energy" very like Freud's theory of libido; energy taken from the so- 
cialist effort through sexuality is energy stolen from the revolution and the proletariat. 

34 Trotsky, op. cit., p. 145. 




THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



171 



children were accommodated outside the home. 35 The entire burden of 
child care and housework was left upon women, frequently alone, as paternal 
responsibility was so often neglected. Urged into employment such women 
were in fact only being awarded the responsibility of three occupations to 
shoulder simultaneously. In the absence of creches and communal house- 
keeping, children were often homeless and neglected; juvenile delinquency 
became a considerable threat. 

Much of the problem was economic. The government, just recovering from 
the terrible poverty of the early Soviet years gave its priority to heavy in- 
dustry and armaments. 36 Allowing reaction to replace revolution is simply 
easier in troubled situations, and by 1936 party official Svetlov could an- 
nounce that since the state is "temporarily unable to take upon itself family 
functions" it is forced to "conserve the family." 37 

Approaching such great social change with misconceptions and an out- 
right failure to supply the promised provisions, the inevitable confusion fol- 
lowing upon such radical social transformation unaccompanied by sufficient 
institutional replacement was interpreted by party functionaries as chaos. 
A population so recently freed did not know how to use its freedom, and 
(especially under the conditions of poverty following the civil wars of 19 18- 
22) sexuality was brutalized. There appears to have been a good deal of 
exploitative or irresponsible sexuality as well, arising partly out of ignorance 
or guilt (a failure or inability on the part of the people to avail themselves 
of contraception) 38 and partly from the callousness of inherited attitudes, 
particularly male-supremacist ones. The Bischoff and Harvard Project 
studies documenting individual cases illustrate how, no longer entitled to 
the tyrannical position tsarist patriarchy had awarded him, Soviet man still 
satisfied his impression of sexual superiority in objectified promiscuity and 
domestic irresponsibility. 39 In practice the new sexual freedom applied 
largely as a freedom for men. There is considerable evidence that in many 
ways the conditions of women worsened in the first decades of the revolu- 
tion and that they were sexually exploited on a large scale. The great mass 
of women, illiterate, submissive after centuries of subordination, with little 
realization of their rights, could scarcely take advantage of the new free- 

35 Geiger quoted in discussion in Brown, The Role and Status of Women in the Soviet 
Union, op. cit., p. 5 1; and Geiger, The Family in Soviet Russia, op. cit., p. 58. 

ae Where creches were built on some scale after 1936 and 1944 their Function was 
to raise population and release women for Stalin's factories. By this time the ideal of 
sexual freedom and the emancipation of women with which the revolution had begun 
and still gave lip service had ceased to matter. 

37 Schlesinger, op. cit., p. 346. 

38 Accounts of the use of contraception in the twenties and thirties vary. In Soviet 
Journey C1935) Louis Fischer reported a widespread use, but Geiger denies this and 
stresses the government's fear of sponsoring a rigorous drive for contraception. In view of 
the misery the lack of it caused this appears little short of criminal. 

89 Examined in Geiger, op. cit., and elsewhere. 



rffel 




172 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



doms to the degree which men could. Trotsky's observation of how the male 
party member forged ahead (only 10 percent of party members were women 
in the twenties) and finding his overworked wife "regressive" simply dis- 
carded her, has become a commonplace in the literature of the period. 

The abuses which arose from the government's own failures and omis- 
sions opened the way for the experts and the moralists, the party pundits 
and the gradual erosion of the new liberties under the banner of human- 
istic justification of traditional strictures. The revisionists had arrived on the 
scene and the radical views of the feminists and revolutionaries Kollontai 
and Wolffson were publicly censured as unsound. 

At the Congress of Kiev in 1932, abortion was decried for innumerable 
reasons, all of which came down to authoritarian state interest in forcing 
women to bear children, explained as population policy (the birth rate had 
boomed after the revolution and now a slight decline was interpreted as 
catastrophic). There was much cant about "preserving the race," "humanity 
dying out," "morality collapsing," and so forth. The other prevailing rationale 
was based on an equally authoritarian distaste over the fact women now en- 
joyed the control of their bodies; functionaries fussed that women were no 
longer ashamed of abortion and now "considered it their legal right." 40 Dr. 
Koroliov urged his colleagues that "criminal abortion is a sign of immorality 
which finds support in the legalization of abortion ... It prevents mother- 
hood ... Its intention is not that of helping the mother or society; it has 
nothing to do with the protection of maternal health." 41 The effect here is to 
force motherhood on the unwilling as a social obligation, to deny that sexu- 
ality may be removed from procreation, and to create a negative attitude to- 
ward sexuality itself under the guise of pious concern over women and babies. 
The last was hardly necessary, so great was the shame and distaste for sexu- 
ality in Soviet women, a legacy from prerevolutionary attitudes, that the same 
congress could affirm that 60-70 per cent of women were incapable of experi- 
encing sexual pleasure. Despite legalization it had taken ten years to stamp 
out the underground trade in abortions and the excessive or abusive resort to 
abortion was the result of so negative an attitude toward sexuality that women 
felt guilty in using contraception. 42 Despite strong public objection, Stalin's 
Second Five Year Plan in 1936 outlawed abortion in first pregnancies. This is 
often said to be the last occasion on which Stalin consulted public opinion. In 
1944 all legal abortion was abolished, with two-year prison terms for persons 
who aided a woman in securing it. Acute observers perceived that the ra- 
tionalization for the repeal of the right to legal abortion as a desire to protect 

40 Quoted in Reich, The Sexual Revolution, op. cit., p. 206. The speaker is Stroganov. 

41 Quoted in Reich, op. cit., p, 199, 

42 This phenomenon may also be observed today in America where students and other 
young women neglect contraception, unconsciously willing pregnancy to occur, the 
"punishment" courted for repressed "guilt." 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



173 




the health of the mother was a hypocrisy which "obviously camouflaged" 43 
the desire for a rise in the birth rate as the result of war preparations. "We 
v, a ve need of people" Soltz proclaimed, oblivious to the number of homeless 
children, the housing shortage and harried involuntary mothers. Just as in 
Nazi Germany, the mood had changed to one which dictated large popu- 
lation growth in an increasingly militarized society. 

Abortion was the first wedge, but other reactionary attitudes which had 
persisted soon began to reassert themselves. Revolutionary legislation had 
thrown out the old Tsarist paragraph penalizing homosexuality; and in 
March 1934, after fifteen years, it was reintroduced, with penalties of from 
three to eight years. It is an interesting insight into reawakened patriarchal 
sentiment to observe that in Russia, as elsewhere, homosexuality is recog- 
nized and punished only between males; homosexuality between females is 
presumed to be unthinkable or nonexistent. 4,1 There were mass arrests of 
homosexuals and widespread persecution, together with propaganda cam- 
paigns to the effect that homosexuality was "decadent," "oriental," "bour- 
geois," and even "fascist" (guilt through association with the Nazi Man- 
nerbiinde). 

One very real problem facing the Soviet Union was whether it could, 
through a revolutionary education, set up a new psychic structure in its 
members to replace that of patriarchy. And here it failed signally. After a 
period of experimentation, it gradually instituted its own moralistic, inhibit- 
ing ideology, a new authoritarian structure, stressing its own kind of atti- 
tudes toward the sexes and sexuality, and its own standard of the masculine 
as the ideal and the norm, by continual adulation of militaristic achieve- 
ments and the exploits of revolutionaries. Education was again antisexual; 
every effort was made to hamper, divert, and thwart the sexuality of the 
young. Asceticism began to reassert itself as the ideal in schools and among 
the Pioneers (youth groups). Progressive schools such as Vera Schmidt's kin- 
dergarten, an experiment in raising children without sexual guilt or inhibi- 
tion, was closed at the behest of "the authorities" in educational theory. The 
youth communes (Komsomol) floundered for economic and psychological 
reasons, turned authoritarian, 45 and finally failed and were discontinued 

43 Geiger's phrase, op. cit., p. 100. 

44 Only in Sweden have the laws been equalized. Homosexual acts between con- 
senting adults, men or women, are not illegal. Homosexual assault and the seduction of 
minors are legal offenses in both sexes. 

4D It is interesting that Makarenko, author of the chief codification of the new state- 
oriented authoritarian family first distinguished himself as leader of a particularly ascetic 
and militaristic Komsomol established under the auspices of the Soviet Secret Political 
Police for delinquent boys. Makarenko had great contempt for libertarian child-centered 
theories of the twenties; with his rise to eminence progressives had been defeated and 
the new party line supported traditional educational methods and discipline. At times it 
is hard to know if sexual counterrevolution betrayed the women or the youth more bit- 
terly in Russia. See Makarenko, A Book for Parents O937, published in 1940). 



*¦ 




174 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



after 1932- Their efforts to establish a model communal life are studies in the 
psychic incapacity of family-produced youth to establish a collective life style' 
they lacked housing conducive to privacy or order, and vacillated dizzily be- 
tween the sexual climate of the harem and that of the convent. The powers 
of an oppressive sexual ethic triumphantly reasserted themselves in this 
statement of the Commissar for Public Health to students: 

Comrades, you have come to the universities and technical institutes for your 
studies. That is the main goal of your life. And as all your impulses and atti- 
tudes are subordinated to this goal, as you must deny yourself many enjoy- 
ments because they might interfere with your main goal, that of studying and 
becoming collaborators in the reconstruction of the state, so you must subor- 
dinate all other aspects of your existence to this goal. The state is as yet too poor 
to take over the support of you and the education of the children. Therefore 
our advice to you is: Abstinencel ie 

Despite the obvious alternative of contraception, this admonition became 
standard official advice in the Soviet Union as it was elsewhere during the 
era of reaction. 

The Russian retreat from a sexual revolution began with the worried dis- 
cussions of the twenties, but did not get under way until the mid-thirties, 
and was not completed until 1944. 47 Everything was done to re-enforce the 
family. In the new law of 1935 parents were again held responsible for their 
children's education and behavior. Soviet ideology now announced that sex- 
ual union was to be "in principle a life-long union with children." Sex and 
the family, sex and procreation, were welded together again. Having de- 
clined to fulfill its promise of creches and collective housekeeping, and in 
view of its experience without them, as well as in view of the priority it put 
upon industrial projects, particularly armaments, Stalin's Russia preferred 
to bolster the family so that it might perform the functions the state had 
promised but did not choose to afford. At the same time it now felt secure 
that the "new Soviet family" (the old, consisting of an earlier generation, 
had posed a threat) which Makarenko promulgated, with Stalin's support, 
would be an admirable vehicle of state-directed socialization. Paternal au- 
thority was to be upheld again, which is not surprising when one understands 
that the state saw itself as delegating its authority to parents and in turn 
demanding them to rear the young in the correct manner. 48 

46 Quoted in Reich, The Sexual Revolution, pp. 189-90. 

47 With the "Thaw" the situation began to improve; in 1954-55 the right o£ abortion 
was restored and in 1 964-65 bastardy ceased to be registered. In 1964 the distinguished 
social philosopher Strumilin raised new discussion by the suggestion of a kibbutzlike 
collective education very reminiscent of early Soviet hopes. A return to Marxist principles 
in this area might possibly be in the offing. 

48 "In delegating to you a certain measure of societal authority the Soviet State de- 
mands from you the correct upbringing of its future citizens." Anton S. Makarenko, 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



175 



The new divorce law of 1936 punished the error of "mistaking infatua- 
tion with love" in fines levied for divorce of 30-50 roubles. In 1944 a 
harsher law raised the fine to 500-2000 roubles and required petition to a 
lower and higher court, both of which specialized in reconciliations. Free 
divorce had once been "the gift of the revolution"; now great financial, judi- 
cial, and ideological barriers were raised against it. Common law marriage, 
recognized since 1927 was revoked. The ZAG (civil registry) offices were 
smartened up and marriage and divorce no longer transacted at the same 
counter; encouragement was given so that weddings might become ritualistic 
again. Illegitimacy was reinstituted as a concept, severely penalized and stig- 
matized both in mother and child. The father was in such cases no longer 
held responsible. This of course permitted sexuality to become more exploit- 
ative than it had been in the 1920s. It is ironic that the reaction, put through 
in the name of protecting women and children ("the weak") actually 
made their situation far worse. Women now had very little relief or escape 
from the total housekeeping and child-care burden as the old ideal of sexual 
equality became increasingly irrelevant to a nation preparing for war through 
the imposition of a militarist and authoritarian atmosphere often scarcely in- 
distinguishable from traditional patriarchy. The archetypal figures of the 
mother and the soldier replaced the revolutionary comrades and lovers. Svet- 
lov exulted that "motherhood has become a joy." Vast campaigns were 
launched to honor mothers of large families, the law of 1936 awarded bonuses 
to women with six or more children; the law of ^44 rewarded mothers of 
seven or more with honorary titles and decorations. 

A new type of propaganda had appeared in the mid-thirties.r,hrough domes- 
tic melodrama, sentimental films, and editorials in Pravda, which in a more 
and more official tone assured the world that the Soviets regarded the "fam- 
ily as a big and serious thing," asserted that "only a good family man could 
be a good So\iet citizen" and that "marriage is the most serious affair of 
life." Stalin paid a much-publicized visit to his aged mother in the Caucasus. 
Engels' belief in individual sex love and the rights of sexual life to be beyond 
the province of the state were now called "bourgeois" and "irresponsible" 
while un-Marxist pronouncements poured forth: "The state cannot exist 
without the family." Marxism was stood on its head: "There are people who 
dare to assert that the Revolution destroys the family; this is entirely wrong: 
the family is an especially important phase of social relations in the socialist 
society . . . One of the basic rules of Communist morals is that of strength- 
ening the family." 40 

A Book for Parents, translated by Robert Daglish as The Collective Family, A Hand- 
book for Russian Parents (New York, Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1967), pp. 27-28. 
46 These very un-Marxist slogans are reprinted in TimashefF, op. cit., pp. 197-98. 



lm 



!' ! 



176 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



International Communism followed suit, and France's Humanite gave 
out the alarming cry: 

Save the family! Help us in our great inquiry in the interest of the right to 
love . . . The Communists are confronted by a very grave situation. The coun- 
try which they are to revolutionize, the French world, runs the danger of being 
crippled and depopulated. The maliciousness of a dying capitalism, its im- 
morality, the egotism it creates, the misery, the clandestine abortion which it 
provokes, destroy the family. The Communists want to fight in the defense of 
the French family . . . They want to take over a strong country and a fertile 
race. The USSR points the way. But it is necessary to take active measures to 
save the race. 50 

Of course this is not only in direct contradiction to Marxist principles, but 
in essence much the same sort o£ thing one reads in Nazi pronounce- 
ments. Even the Ladies' Home Journal, by no means in disagreement as to 
the family point of view, compares creditably with it as to style of persuasion. 
It is a remarkable fact that, as John Stuart Mill pointed out long before, 
the authoritarian and patriarchal mind cannot separate the liberation of 
women from racial extinction and the death of love, an equation of human 
affection and reproduction with slavish subordination, excessive or acci- 
dental progeny, and servile affection which never fails to convict the 
speaker. 

Twenty-seven years after the revolution, the Soviet position had com- 
pletely reversed itself. The initial radical freedoms in marriage, divorce, abor- 
tion, child care, and the family were largely abridged and the reaction gained 
so that, by 1943, even coeducation was abolished in the Soviet Union. The 
sexual revolution was over, the counterrevolution triumphant. In the fol- 
lowing decades conservative opinion elsewhere rejoiced in pointing to the 
Soviet as an object lesson in the folly of change. 



THE REACTION IN IDEOLOGY 
Freud and the Influence of Psychoanalytic Thought 

The pressures of official suppression cannot account for the counterrevolu- 
tion. For in most places the sexual revolution collapsed from within and was 
undermined more through its own imperfections than from hostile forces 
which combined to crush it. The real causes of the counterrevolution ap- 
pear to lie in the fact that the sexual revolution had, perhaps necessarily, 
even inevitably, concentrated on the superstructure of patriarchal policy, 
changing its legal forms, its more flagrant abuses, altering its formal educa- 

60 P. Vaillant-Courturier, Humanite, October 3.1, 1935. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



J 77 



tional patterns, but leaving the socialization processes of temperament and 
role differentiation intact. Basic attitudes, values, emotions— all that consti- 
tuted the psychic structure several millennia of patriarchal society had built 
up— remained insufficiently affected, if not completely untouched. Moreover, 
the major institutions of the old tradition, patriarchal marriage and the fam- 
ily, were never or rarely challenged. Only the outer surface of society had 
been changed; underneath the essential system was preserved undisturbed. 
Should it receive new sources of support, new ratification, new ideological 
justifications, it could be mobilized anew. Patriarchy could, as indeed it did, 
remain in force as a thoroughly efficient political system, a method of social 
governance, without any visible superstructure beyond the family, simply 
because it lived on in the mind and heart where it had first rooted itself in 
the conditioning of its subjects, and from which a few reforms were hardly 
likely to evict it. 

Recently, a number of studies have begun to explore the conservative 
trends that operated between 1930-60, causing a deterioration in the eco- 
nomic and educational status of American women. 51 They attribute it to 
postwar reaction, conservative or anti-Communist animus toward the Soviet 
or other Socialist experimentation, an economic situation where women are 
exploited as a reserve labor force, periodically and widely purged from em- 
ployment, and when reintroduced, confined to its lower reaches, and finally, 
to the ideology of the "higher domesticity." 02 As such phenomena have, to 
some degree, already been documented, what shall concern us here are the 
more diffuse currents of opinion in literature and in scholarship, the intel- 
lectual origins and the atmosphere of the counterrevolutionary era. 

If new ideological support were to come to the patriarchal social order, its 
sex roles and its differentiated temperaments of masculine and feminine, it 
could not come from religion, although the decades in question did sec a re- 
ligious revival, particularly in the prestigious and influential quarters of lit- 
erature and the university. T. S. Eliot's piety and the sanctity of the fashiona- 
ble neo-orthodoxy at Oxford and in the New Criticism could scarcely serve 
as a lifeboat for an entire society any more than could the wholesale defec- 
tion of literary and critical minds from rationality into the caverns of myth. 
The new formulation of old attitudes had to come from science and particu- 
larly from the emerging social sciences of psychology, sociology, and anthro- 

01 See The President's Report on the Status of Women, William L. O'Neill's Everyone 
Was Brave, The Rise and Fall of Feminism in America (Chicago, Quadrangle, 1969), 
Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique (New York, Norton, 1963), and Marlene 
Dixon's "Why Women's Liberation?" Ramparts, November 1969. The gap between 
male and female earnings has been growing since the thirties. In 1940 women stil! held 
45 per cent of all professional and technical occupations, by 1967 they held only 37 
per cent. In the t93os women received two out of five of the B.A. and M.A. degrees 
and one in seven of the Ph.Ds. Yet in 196a only one in three persons who received a 
B.A. or M.A. was a woman, one in ten of those who received Ph.Ds. (figures from 
Dixon). 

52 The term is O'Neill's. 



178 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



pology— the most useful and authoritative branches of social control and 
manipulation. To be unassailable, there should be some connection, however 
dubious, with the more readily validated sciences of biology, mathematics, 
and medicine. To fill the needs of conservative societies and a population too 
reluctant or too perplexed to carrv out revolutionary changes in social life, 
even to the drastic modification of basic units such as the family, a number 
of new prophets arrived upon the scene to clothe the old doctrine of the sep- 
arate spheres in the fashionable language of science. 

The most influential of these was Sigmund Freud, beyond question the 
strongest individual counterrevolutionary force in the ideology of sexual 
politics during the period. Although popular in England and on the con- 
tinent in Lawrence's time, the prestige of Freud's sexual theories did not ar- 
rive at, still less maintain, such complete ascendancy there as they achieved 
in the United States. In America, the influence of Freud is almost incalcula- 
ble, and America, in many ways the first center of the sexual revolution, ap- 
pears to have need of him. Although generally accepted as a prototype of the 
liberal urge toward sexual freedom, and a signal contributor toward soften- 
ing traditional puritanical inhibitions upon sexuality, the effect of Freud's 
work, that of his followers, and still more that of his popularizers, was to 
rationalize the invidious relationship between the sexes, to ratify tradi- 
tional roles, and to validate temperamental differences. 

By an irony nearly tragic, the discoveries of a great pioneer, whose theories 
of the unconscious and of infant sexuality were major contributions to hu- 
man understanding, were in time invoked to sponsor a point of view essen- 
tially conservative. And as regards the sexual revolution's goal of liberating 
female humanity from its traditional subordination, the Freudian position 
came to be pressed into the service of a strongly counterrevolutionary atti- 
tude. Although the most unfortunate effects of vulgar Freudianism far ex- 
ceeded the intentions of Freud himself, its anti-feminism was not without 
foundation in Freud's own work. 

In a moment of humble confusion Freud once confessed to his students: 
"If you want to know more about femininity, you must interrogate your own 
experience, or turn to the poets, or else wait until science can give you more 
coherent information." 53 On another occasion he admitted to Marie Bona- 
parte "the great question that has never been answered and which I have not 
been able to answer, despite my thirty years of research into the feminine 
soul, is "What does a woman want?' " 54 In the face of such basic uncertainty 
it is most unfortunate that Freud insisted on proceeding so far in construct- 
ing a psychology of women. 

Probably the real tragedy of Freudian psychology is that its fallacious in- 

53 Freud, "Femininity," New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (1933), trans- 
lated by James Strachey (New York, Norton, 1964), p. 135. 

84 Freud in a letter to Bonaparte quoted in Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of 
Sigmund Freud (New York, Basic Books, 1953), Vol. II, p. 421 . 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



179 



terpretations of feminine character were based upon clinical observations of 
great validity. For the women who sought out psychoanalysis were (and in 
many cases still are) the "unadjusted women" of their time, all those who in 
Viola Klein's eloquent description, were symptomatic of a "widespread, in 
fact, a general dissatisfaction with their sexual role": 

It was expressed in inferiority feelings, in contempt for their own sex, in revolt 
against their passive role, in envy of man's greater freedom, in the ambition to 
equal man in intellectual or artistic achievements, in strivings for independence 
, . . and in all sorts of devices to make up for the social disadvantages of not 
being a man. 55 

Through his clinical work Freud was able to observe women suffering 
from two causes: sexual inhibition (sometimes sufficiently great as to bring 
on severe symptoms, even hysteria), ne and a great discontentment with their 
social circumstances. In general, his tendency was to believe the second over- 
dependent upon the first, and to recommend in female sexual fulfillment a 
panacea for what were substantial symptoms of social unrest within an op- 
pressive culture. 

I 

In reconsidering Freud's theories on women we must ask ourselves not 
only what conclusions he drew from the evidence at hand but also upon what 
assumptions he drew them. Freud did not accept his patient's symptoms as 
evidence of a justified dissatisfaction with the limiting circumstances im- 
posed on them by society, but as symptomatic of an independent and uni- 
versal feminine tendency. 67 He named this tendency "penis envy," traced 
its origin to childhood experience and based his theory of the psychology of 
women upon it, aligning what he took to be the three corollaries of feminine 
psychology, passivity, masochism, and narcissism, so that each was depend- 
ent upon, or related to, penis envy. 

As the Freudian understanding of female personality is based upon the 
idea of penis envy, it requires an elaborate, and often repetitious, exposi- 
tion. 1 ' 8 Beginning with the theory of penis envy, the definition of the female 

BK Viola Klein, The Feminine Character, History of an Ideology (London, Kegan 
Paul, 1946), pp. 72-73. 

50 Freud's first cases were hysterics; see Vol. I of his Collected Papers (1893-1905) 
pp. 9-272, and Dora. An Analysis of a Case of Hysteria (1905-9]) edited by Philip 
Rieff (New York, Collier, 1966). 

07 Here Freud's procedure was very different from the libera] and humane attitude 
he adopted toward patients suffering from sexual inhibition. 

58 See especially "Femininity." After making use of such patently invidious terms as 
"the boy's far superior equipment" (p. 126), "her inferior clitoris" (p, 127), "genital 
deficiency" (p. 132), and "original sexual inferiority" (p. 132), Freud proposes to his 
audience that penis envy is the foundation of his whole theory of female psychology, 
warning them that should they demur before his hypothesis, they would sabotage the 



i8o SEXUAL POLITICS 

is negative— what she is is the result of the Fact that she is not a male and 
"lacks" a penis. Freud assumed that the female's discovery of her sex is, in and 
of itself, a catastrophe of such vast proportions that it haunts a woman all 
through life and accounts for most aspects of her temperament. His entire 
psychology of women, from which all modern psychology and psychoanalysis 
derives heavily, is built upon an original tragic experience— born female. 
Purportedly, Freud is here only relaying the information supplied by women 
themselves, the patients who furnished his clinical data, the basis of his later 
generalities about all women. It was in this way, Freud believed, he had 
been permitted to see how women accepted the idea that to be born female is 
to be born "castrated": 

As we learn from psycho-analytic work, women regard themselves as wronged 
from infancy, as undeservedly cut short and set back; and the embirterment of 
so many daughters against their mothers derives, in the last analysis, from the 
reproach against her of having brought them into the world as women instead 
of as men. 50 

Assuming that this were true, the crucial question, manifestly, is to ask why 
this might be so. Either maleness is indeed an inherently superior phenome- 
non, and in which case its "betterness" could be empirically proved and 
demonstrated, or the female misapprehends and reasons erroneously that she 
is inferior. And again, one must ask why. What forces in her experience, her 
society and socialization have led her to see herself as an inferior being 1 ? The 
answer would seem to lie in the conditions of patriarchal society and the 
inferior position of women within this society. But Freud did not choose to 
pursue such a line of reasoning, preferring instead an etiology of childhood 
experience based upon the biological fact of anatomical differences. 

While it is supremely unfortunate that Freud should prefer to bypass 
the more likely social hypothesis to concentrate upon the distortions of in- 
fantile subjectivity, his analysis might yet have made considerable sense were 
he sufEciendy objective to acknowledge that woman is born female in a 
masculine-dominated culture which is bent upon extending its values even 
to anatomy and is therefore capable of investing biological phenomena with 
symbolic force. In much the same manner we perceive that the traumatizing 
circumstance of being born black in a white racist society invests skin color 
with symbolic value while telling us nothing about racial traits as such. 

In dismissing the wider cultural context of feminine dissatisfaction and 

entire construct: "If you reject the idea as fantastic and regard my belief in the influence 
of lack of a penis on the configuration of femininity as an idee fixe, I am of course 
defenceless." (P. 132.) My critique of Freud's notions of women is indebted to an un- 
published summary by Frances Kamm. 

60 Freud, "Some Character Types Met With in Psycho-Analysis Work" (1915) Col- 
lected Papers of Sigmund Freud, edited by Joan Riviere (New Yoik, Basic Books, 
1959), Vol. IV, p. 323. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



i8r 



isolating it in early childhood experience, Freud again ignored the social con- 
text of childhood by locating a literal feminine "castration" complex in the 
child's discovery of the anatomical differentiation between the sexes. Freud 
believed he had found the key to feminine experience— in that moment when 
ojrls discover they are "castrated"— a "momentous discovery which little girls 
are destined to make": 

They notice the penis of a brother or playmate, strikingly visible and of large 
proportions, at once recognize it as the superior counterpart of their own small 
and inconspicuous organ, and from that time forward fall a victim to envy for 
the penis. 60 

There are several unexplained assumptions here: why is the girl instantly 
struck by the proposition that bigger is better? Might she just as easily, reason- 
ing from the nai'veri of childish narcissism imagine the penis is an ex- 
crescence and take her own body as norm? Boys clearly do, as Freud makes 
clear, and in doing so respond to sexual enlightenment not with the reflec- 
tion that their own bodies are peculiar, but, far otherwise, with a "horror of 
the mutilated creature or triumphant contempt for her." 61 Secondly, the 
superiority of this "superior counterpart," which the girl is said to "recognize 
at once" in the penis, is assumed to relate to the autoerotic satisfactions of 
childhood; but here again the child's experience provides no support for 
such an assumption. 

Much of Freudian theory rests upon this moment of discovery and one 
is struck how, in the case of the female, to recapitulate the peculiar drama 
of penis envy is to rehearse again the fable of the Fall, a Fall that is Eve's 
alone. 62 As children, male and female first inhabit a paradisiacal playground 
where roles are interchangeable, active and passive, masculine and feminine. 
Until the awesome lapsarian moment when the female discovers her in- 
feriority, her castration, we are asked to believe that she had assumed her 
clitoris a penis. One wonders why. Freud believes it is because she mastur- 
bated with it, and he assumes that she will conclude that what is best for 
such purposes must be a penis, 63 Freud insists upon calling the period of 
clitoral autoeroticism "phallic" in girls. 

60 Freud, "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinctions Between 
the Sexes" (1925) Collected Papers, Vol. V, p, 190. 

61 Tbid., p. 191. 

62 Not only has Adam grace within his loins to assure him lie belongs to a superior 
species, but even bis later fears of castration which come to him after a glimpse oE the 
"mutilated creature" causes him to repress bis Oedipal desires (out of fear of a castrating 
father's revenge) and in the process develop the strong super-ego which Freud believes 
accounts for what he took to be the male's inevitable and transcendent moral and cultural 
superiority. 

«3 Because she feels free, equal, and active then, Freud says "the little girl is a 
little man." "Femininity," p. 118. So strong is Freud's masculine bias here that it has 
obliterated linguistic integrity: the autoerotic state might as well, in both cases, be 



1 8a 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Moreover, the revelation which Freud imagined would poison female life 
is probably, in most cases, a glimpse of a male playmate urinating or having a 
bath. It is never explained how the girl child makes the logical jump from 
the sight of bathing or urination to knowledge that the boy masturbates with 
this novel article. Even should her first sight of the penis occur in masturba- 
tory games, Freud's supposition that she could judge this foreign item to be 
more conducive to autoerotic pleasure than her own clitoris (she having no 
possible experience of penile autoeroticism as males have none of clitoral) 
such as assumption is groundless. Yet Freud believed that female autoeroti- 
cism declines as a result of enlightenment, finding in this "yet another sur- 
prising effect of penis-envy, or of the discovery of the inferiority of the 
clitoris." 04 Here, as is so often the case, one cannot separate Freud's account 
of how a child reasons from how Freud himself reasons, and his own lan- 
guage, invariably pejorative, tends to confuse the issue irremediably. In- 
deed, since he has no objective proof of any consequence to offer in support 
of his notion of penis envy or of a female castration complex, 05 one is struck 
by how thoroughly the subjectivity in which all these events are cast tends 
to be Freud's own, or that of a strong masculine bias, even of a rather gross 
male-supremacist bias. 66 

This habitual masculine bias of Freud's own terms and diction, and the 
attitude it implies, is increased and further emphasized by his followers: 
Deutsch refers to the clitoris as an "inadequate substitute" for the penis; 
Karl Abraham refers to a "poverty in external genitals" in the female, and 
all conclude that even bearing children can be but a poor substitute for a 



called "clitoral" For all the light shed by these terms. Freud's usage is predicated 
on the belief that masturbation is the active pursuit of pleasure, and activity masculine 
per se. "We are entitled to keep to our view that in the phallic phase of girls the clitoris 
is the leading erotogenic zone." Ibid. 

ei "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinctions Between the 
Sexes," p. 193. 

63 The entirety of Freud's clinical data always consists of his analysis of patients and 
his own self-analysis. In the case of penis envy he has remarkably little evidence from 
patients and his description of masculine contempt and feminine grief upon the discovery 
of sexual differences are extraordinarily autobiographical. Little flans (Freud's own 
grandson) a five-year-old boy with an obsessive concern for his "widdler" furnishes the 
rest of the masculine data. Though an admirable topic of precise clinical research, it was 
and is, remarkably difficult for Freud, or anyone else, to make generalizations about how 
children first come to sexual knowledge, family and cultural patterns being so diverse, 
further complicated by the host of variable factors within individual experience, such as 
the number, age, and sex of siblings, the strength and consistency of the nakedness 
taboo, etc. 

08 Ernest Jones aptly described Fieud's attitude here as "phallocentric." There is some- 
thing behind Freud's assumptions reminiscent of the ancient misogynist postulate that 
females are but incomplete or imperfect males-e.g., deformed humans, the male being 
accepted as the norm— a view shared by Augustine, Aquinas etc. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



183 



constitutional inadequacy. 87 As Klein observes in her critique of Freud, it is 
a curious hypothesis that "one half of humanity should have biological rea- 
sons to feel at a disadvantage for not having what the other half possess 
(but not vice versa)." 08 It is especially curious to imagine that half the race 
should attribute their clear and obvious social-status inferiority to the crudest 
biological reasons when so many more promising social factors are involved. 

It would seem that Freud has managed by this highly unlikely hypothesis 
to assume that young females negate the validity, and even, to some extent, 
the existence, of female sexual characteristics altogether. Surely the first thing 
all children must notice is that mother has breasts, while father has none. 
What is possibly the rather impressive effect of childbirth on young minds is 
here overlooked, together with the girl's knowledge not only of her clitoris, 
but her vagina as well. 

In formulating the theory of penis envy, Freud not only neglected the 
possibility of a social explanation for feminine dissatisfaction but precluded 
it by postulating a literal jealousy of the organ whereby the male is distin- 
guished. As it would appear absurd to charge adult women with these 
values, the child, and a drastic experience situated far back in child- 
hood, are invoked. Nearly the entirety of feminine development, adjusted 
or maladjusted, is now to be seen in terms of the cataclysmic moment of 
discovered castration. 



So far, Freud has merely pursued a line of reasoning he attributes, rightly 
or wrongly, to the subjectivity of female youth. Right or wrong, his account 
purports to be little more than description of what girls erroneously believe. 
But there is prescription as well in the Freudian account. For while the dis- 
covery of her castration is purported to be a universal experience in the 
female, her response to this fate is the criterion by which her health, her ma- 
turity and her future are determined through a rather elaborate series of 
stages: "After a woman has become aware of the wound to her narcissism, she 
develops, like a scar, a sense of inferiority. When she has passed beyond her 
first attempt at explaining her lack of a penis as being a punishment personal 
to herself and has realized that that sexual character is a universal one, she 
begins to share the contempt felt by men for a sex which is the lesser in so 
important a respect." 69 The female first blames her mother, "who sent her 
into the world so insufficiently equipped" and who is "almost always held re- 
sponsible for her lack of a penis." 70 Again, Freud's own language makes no 
distinction here between fact and feminine fantasy. It is not enough the girl 

67 Kaj-] Abraham, "Manifestations of the Female Castration Complex," International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis, Vol. 3, March 1922. 

68 Klein, op. cif„ pp. 83-84. 

69 "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinction Between the 
Sexes," p. 192, 

™lbid., p. 193. 



1 84 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



reject her own sex however; if she is to mature, she must redirect her self 
positively toward a masculine object. This is designated as the beginning of 
the Oedipal stage in the female. We are told that the girl now gives up the 
hope of impregnating her mother, an ambition Freud attributes to her. (One 
wonders how youth has discovered conception, an elaborate and subtle proc- 
ess which children do not discover by themselves, and not all primitive adults 
can fathom.) The girl is said to assume her female parent has mutilated her 
as a judgment on her general un worthiness, or possibly for the crime of mas- 
turbation, and now turns her anxious attention to her father. 71 

At this stage of her childhood the little girl at first expects her father to 
prove magnanimous and award her a penis. Later, disappointed in this hope 
she learns to content herself with the aspiration of bearing his baby. The 
baby is given out as a curious item; it is actually a penis, not a baby at all: 
"the girl's libido slips into position by means— there is really no other way t0 
put it-of the equation 'penis-child.'" 72 Although she will never relinquish 
some hope of acquiring a penis ("we ought to recognize this wish for a penis 
as being par excellence a feminine one") 73 a baby is as close to a penis as 
the girl shall get. The new penis wish is metamorphosed into a baby, a quaint 
feminine-coated penis, which has the added merit of being a respectable am- 
bition. (It is interesting that Freud should imagine the young female's fears 
center about castration rather than rape-a phenomenon which girls are in 
fact, and with reason, in dread of, since it happens to them and castration 
does not.) Girls, he informs us, now relinquish some of their anxiety over 
their castration, but never cease to envy and resent penises 74 and so while 
"impotent" they remain in the world a constant hazard to the well-provided 
male. There are overtones here of a faintly capitalist antagonism between 
the haves and the have nots. This seems to account for the considerable fear 
of women inherent in Freudian ideology and the force of an accusation of 
penis envy when leveled at mature women. 

The Freudian "family romance," domestic psychodrama more horrific than 
a soap opera, continues. The archetypal girl is now flung into the Oedipal 
stage of desire for her father, having been persuaded of the total inadequacy 
of her clitoris, and therefore of her sex and her self. The boy, meanwhile is 
so aghast by the implications of sexual enlightenment that he at first re- 
presses the information. Later, he can absorb it only by accompanying the 
discovery of sexual differentiation with an overpowering contempt for the 
female. It is difficult to understand how, setting aside the social context, as 

71 The description of female psychological development is from Freud's Three Con- 
tributions to the Theory of Sex, "Femininity," "Some Psychological Consequences of 
the Anatomical Distinction Between the Sexes," and "Female Sexuality." 

™ "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinctions Between the 
Sexes," p. 195. 

73 "Femininity," p. 128. 

T-'See "Female Sexuality" (1931), Collected Works, Vol. V, pp. 2 5 2-72. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



i8 S 



Freud's theory does so firmly, a boy could ever become this convinced of the 
superiority of the penis. Yet Freud assures us that "as a result of the discovery 
of women's lack of a penis they [females] are debased in value for girls 
just as they are for boys and later perhaps for men." 75 

Conflict with the father warns the boy that the castration catastrophe 
might occur to him as well. He grows wary for his own emblem and sur- 
renders his sexual desires for his mother out of fear. 70 Freud's exegesis of 
the neurotic excitements of nuclear family life might constitute, in itself, 
considerable evidence of the damaging effects of this institution, since 
through the parents, it presents to the very young a set of primary sexual 
objects who are a pair o£ adults, with whom intercourse would be incestuous 
were it even physically possible. 

While Freud strongly prescribes that all lingering hopes of acquiring a 
penis be abandoned and sublimated in maternity, what he recommends is 
merely a displacement, since even maternal desires rest upon the last vestige 
of penile aspiration. For, as she continues to mature, we are told, the female 
never gives up the hope of a penis, now always properly equated with a baby. 
Thus men grow to love women, or better yet, their idea of women, whereas 
women grow to love babies. 77 It is said that the female doggedly continues 
her sad phallic quest in childbirth, never outgrowing her Oedipal circum- 
stance of wanting a penis by having a baby. "Her happiness is great if later 
on this wish for a baby finds fulfilment in reality, and quite especially so if 
the baby is a little boy who brings the longed-for penis with him." 78 Freudian 
logic has succeeded in converting childbirth, an impressive female accom- 
plishment, and the only function its rationale permits her, into nothing more 
than a hunt for a male organ. It somehow becomes the male prerogative even 
to give birth, as babies are but surrogate penises. The Female is bested at the 
only function Freudian theory recommends for her, reproduction. Further- 
more, her libido is actually said to be too small to qualify her as a constructive 
agent here, since Freud repeatedly states she has less sexual drive than the 
male. Woman is thus granted very little validity even within her limited 
existence and second-rate biological equipment: were she to deliver an entire 
orphanage of progeny, they would only be so many dildoes. 



Until active "phallic" autoeroticism ceases, with the acceptance of clitoral 
inferiority, correct maturation cannot proceed. Here Freud is particularly 
prescriptive: "masturbation, at all events of the clitoris, is a masculine ac- 
tivity and the elimination of the clitoral sexuality is a necessary pre- 

78 "Femininity," p. 127. 

70 "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinction Between the 
Sexes" and elsewhere in connection with the Oedipus complex in males. 
77 "Femininity," p. 134. 
™lbid., p. 128. 



i86 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



condition for the development of femininity." 7 " (Femininity is prescribed 
as both normal and healthy. Later we shall investigate what it consists of 
more thoroughly.) Adolescent autoeroticism is outlawed; abstinence is es- 
sential to correct female development. In a girl whose development is for- 
tunate so far, there are still obstacles: "she acknowledges the fact of her 
castration, the consequent superiority of the male and her own inferiority, 
but she also rebels against these unpleasant facts." 80 Freud finds it typical of 
nature that "the constitution will not adapt itself to its function without a 
struggle." 81 And so it is that while the regenerate female seeks fulfillment in 
a life devoted to reproduction, others persist in the error of aspiring to an 
existence beyond the biological level of confinement to maternity and repro- 
duction-falling into the error Freud calls "the masculinity complex." 82 
This is how one is to account for the many deviant women, both those who 
renounce sexuality or divert it to members of their own sex, as well as those 
who pursue "masculine aims." The latter group do not seek the penis openly 
and honestly in maternity, but instead desire to enter universities, pursue 
an autonomous or independent course in life, take up with feminism, or grow 
restless and require treatment as "neurotics." Freud's method was to castigate 
such "immature" women as "regressive" or incomplete persons, clinical cases 
of "arrested development." 83 

How penis envy, repressed but never overcome, becomes the primary 
source of health or pathology; good or evil in female life is left to a mysterious 
deciding force called the "constitutional factor." 84 Consequently, if a woman 
takes her fate gracefully, though still a member of an obviously inferior spe- 
cies, she may at least acknowledge her plight and confine herself to maternity. 
But should she grow insubordinate, she will invade the larger world which 
Freud is unthinkingly convinced is, of itself, male "territory" and seek to 
"compete," thereby threatening men. She may then be convicted of "mas- 
culinity complex" or "masculine protest." 

In such cases Freud and his school after him will do all in their power to 
convince her of the error of her ways: by gentle persuasion, harsh ridicule, 
and when vulgar Freudianism has come to power, by the actual mental 
policing of "pop psych." The renegade must adjust or succumb. One is 
never enlightened as to what proof exists that all human (as distinct from 

79 "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinctions Between the 
Sexes," p. 194, 

80 "Female Sexuality," p. 257. 

81 "Femininity," p. 117. 

ss "And if the defence against femininity is so vigorous, from what other source can it 
derive its strength than from that striving for masculinity which found its earlier expres- 
sion in the child's penis-«nvy and might well take its name from this." "Female Sex- 
uality," p. z 7 z. 

83 See "Femininity," p. 130, and elsewhere, also "Analysis Terminable and Intermi- 
nable," Collected Works, Vol. V. 

84 "Femininity," p. 130. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



187 



biological or reproductive) pursuits, interesting or uninteresting, designated 
jnale "territory," are in fact intrinsically so, or on what biological grounds it 
can be proven that literacy, the university, or the professions are really in- 
herently male. It would be easy to say that Freud mistakes custom for inher- 
ency, the male's domination of cultural modes for nature, but his hypothesis 
is so weighted with expedient interest that to do this would be to call him 
naive. 

A philosophy which assumes that "the demand for justice is a modification 
of envy," 86 and informs the dispossessed that the circumstances of their depri- 
vation are organic, therefore unalterable, is capable of condoning a great deal 
of injustice. One can predict the advice such a philosophy would have in 
store for other disadvantaged groups displeased with the status quo, and as 
the social and political effects of such lines of reasoning are fairly clear, it is 
not difficult to see why Freud finally became so popular a thinker in conserva- 
tive societies. 

Freud had spurned an excellent opportunity to open the door to hundreds 
of enlightening studies on the effect of male-supremacist culture on the ego 
development of the young female, preferring instead to sanctify her oppres- 
sion in terms of the inevitable law of "biology." The theory of penis envy has 
so effectively obfuscated understanding that all psychology has done since 
has not yet unraveled this matter of social causation. If, as seems unlikely, 
penis envy can mean anything at all, it is productive only within the total 
cultural context of sex. And here it would seem that girls are fully cognizant 
of male supremacy long before they see their brother's penis. It is so much a 
part of their culture, so entirely present in the favoritism of school and family, 
in the image of each sex presented to them by all media, religion, and in every 
model of the adult world they perceive, that to associate it with a boy's dis- 
tinguishing genital would, since they have learned a thousand other distin- 
guishing sexual marks by now, be either redundant or irrelevant. Confronted 
with so much concrete evidence of the male's superior status, sensing on all 
sides the depreciation in which they are held, girls envy not the penis, but 
only what the penis gives one social pretensions to. Freud appears to have 
made a major and rather foolish confusion between biology and culture, 
anatomy and status. It is still more apparent that his audience found such a 
confusion serviceable. 

However complacent he may appear, the feminist movement appears to 
have posed a considerable threat to Freud. His statements on women are often 
punctuated with barbs against the feminist point of view. The charge of penis 
envy against all rebels is reiterated again and again, an incantation to disarm 
the specter of emancipated or intellectual women, oddities who are putting 
themselves to unnecessary trouble in a futile effort to compensate for their 
organic inferiority by stabs at cultural achievement, for which Freud assumes 



ss lbid., p. 134. 



i88 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



the possession of a penis is a sine qua non. He even complains that the women 
who consult him in psychoanalysis do so to obtain a penis." 11 Since this is ob- 
scure, it is necessary to translate: female patients consulted him in the hope 
of becoming more productive in their work; in return for their fees Freud did 
what he could to cause them to abandon their vocations as unnatural aber- 
rations. 87 Convinced that the connection between the penis and intellectual 
ability is unquestionably organic, Freud protests with a genial shrug "in the 
psychic field the biological factor is really the rock bottom." 88 The intellectual 
superiority of the male, constitutionally linked with the penis, is close to an 
ascertainable fact for Freud, a rock bottom of remarkable comfort. 

Freud believed that two aspects of woman's character are directly related 
to penis envy: modesty and jealousy. It is her self-despair over the "defect" of 
her "castration," we are told, which gives rise to the well-known shame of 
women. One is struck at how much kinder Victorian chivalry could be with 
its rigamarolc about "purity." Freud designated shame as a feminine char- 
acteristic "par excellence." 96 Its purpose, in his view, is simply the conceal- 
ment of her hapless defect. As among the primitives, so today, the woman 
hides her parts to hide her wound. When Freud suggests that modesty in 
women was originally designed "for concealment of genital deficiency" he 
is even willing to describe pubic hair as the response of "nature herself to 
cover the female fault, 80 

Although it is one of Freud's favorite notions that women have not, and 
for constitutional reasons cannot, contribute to civilization (Otto Weininger, 
a misogynist thinker to whom Freud was often indebted, thought genius 
itself masculine and a female genius a contradiction in terms) Freud does 
allow that women might have invented weaving and plaiting—discoveries 

80 "The wish to get the longed-for penis eventually, in spite of everything, may con- 
tribute to the motives that drive a mature woman to analysis ... a capacity, for instance, 
to carry on an intellectual profession— may often be recognized as a sublimated modifica- 
tion of this repressed wish." ("Femininity," p. 125.) What should happen however, is 
this; "the unsatisfied wish foe a penis should be converted into a wish for a child and 
for a man who possesses a penis." ("Analysis Terminable and Interminable," p. 355.) 
Intellectual striving or an urge for human fulfillment beyond this confining recipe is 
castigated as unrepressed bisexuality or "masculine striving" where "the wish for mas- 
culinity persists in the unconscious, and . . . exercises a disturbing influence." (Ibid.) 

81 It is difficult work, and Freud confesses that "at no point in one's analytic work 
does one suffer more from the oppressive feeling that one is 'talking to the winds' than 
when one is trying to persuade a female patient to abandon her wish for a penis on the 
ground of its being unrealizable." "Analysis Terminable and Interminable," p. 356. 

88 "We often feel that when we have reached the penis wish and the masculine pro- 
test we have penetrated all the psychological strata and reached Isedrock' and that our 
task is accomplished. And this is probably correct, for in the psychic field the biological 
factor is really the rock bottom. The repudiation of femininity must surely be biological 
fact, part of the great riddle of sex." Ibid., p. 356-57. 

89 "Femininity," p. 132. 
so lhid. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



189 



that spring from an identical impulse— the need to hide their deformity." 1 
A folk-like accusation of female jealousy is also part of Freud's program and 
he assures us this vice springs from penis envy as well. 02 He is of the opinion 
that males are less prone to sexual jealousy (on many occasions Freud puts 
in a good word for the double standard which makes men's lives richer in 
sexual opportunity) and he sees in the vigilance of husbands, fathers and 
brothers, only the watchful care of property owners. Monogamous mar- 
riage is an institution with which he found much fault, but mainly on the 
grounds that it hampers masculine freedom. The attribution of moral jealousy 
and a low moral sense to women inspires Freud to remarks of this kind— "the 
fact that women must be regarded as having little sense of justice, is no doubt 
related to the predominance of envy in their mental life." 93 In view of the 
social position of women this is a remarkably damaging accusation, for to 
accuse a deprived group of spitefulness and no sense of fairness, is to dis- 
credit or deprive its members of the moral position which is their only claim 
for just treatment. 

Coming as it did, at the peak of the sexual revolution, Freud's doctrine 
of penis envy is in fact a superbly timed accusation, enabling masculine 
sentiment to take the offensive again as it had not since the disappearance 
of overt misogyny when the pose of chivalry became fashionable. The whole 
weight of responsibility, and even of guilt, is now placed upon any woman 
unwilling to "stay in her place." The theory of penis envy shifts the blame of 
her suffering to the female for daring to aspire to a biologically impossible 
state. Any hankering for a less humiliating and circumscribed existence is im- 
mediately ascribed to unnatural and unrealistic deviation from her genetic 
identity and therefore her fate. A woman who resists "femininity," e.g., femi- 
nine temperament, status, and role, is thought to court neurosis, for feminin- 
ity is her fate as "anatomy is destiny." In so evading the only destiny nature 
has granted her, she courts nothingness. 

Freud's circular method in formulating penis envy begins by reporting chil- 
dren's distorted impressions, gradually comes to accept them as the correct 
reaction, goes on to present its own irresponsible version of the socio-sexual 
context, and then, through a nearly imperceptible series of transitions, slides 
from description to a form of prescription which insures the continuance of 
the patriarchal status quo, under the guise of health and normality. Apart 
from ridicule, the counterrevolutionary period never employed a more wither- 
ing or destructive weapon against feminist insurgence than the Freudian 
accusation of penis envy, 

si Ibid. 

92 Ii»i d., p. 134. The charge is made in "Female Sexuality" and a number of other 
places as well. 

93 Ibid. 



I 90 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



II 



Since Freud's conception of female character depends as much upon his 
understanding of biology as it does upon the psychological motive of penis 
envy, it is necessary to outline the former before proceeding. For the gravest 
distortion in Freud's theory of female psychology stems from his incapacity, 
unconscious or deliberate, to separate two radically different phenomena, fe- 
male biology and feminine status. By inferring the latter is as much, or nearly 
as much, the product of nature as the former, and somehow inevitable, rather 
than the product of a social situation, he seems eager to convince us that what 
a man's world has made of woman is only what nature had made of her 
first. 

In general, Freud defines and identifies the masculine with activity, the 
feminine with passivity. 94 He rationalizes this on two grounds: the sexual 
behavior of his contemporaries, both in its social and in its coital manifesta- 
tions, and the attributes of biosexual materials and processes: sperm and pene- 
tration are said to be active, vaginal reception and the ova are said to be 
passive." 5 The biological data are themselves overstated; not only does the 
ova journey through the Fallopian tubes and so partake of activity, the sperm 
are caught, held, and lifted by the plungerlike movement of the cervix and 
so partake of passivity. Yet it is scarcely rational to attempt to formulate the 
workings of an entire society upon minor distinctions in the properties of 
microscopic human cells. Nor does Freud ever go so far. He does, however, 
appear to use sexual cells as sources of analogy both of temperament and 
role and in the psychological aspects of masculine and feminine. 

Failing to pause and to consider fully how "masculine" and "feminine" 
are elaborate behavioral constructs for each sex within society, obviously cul- 

M On a number of occasions Freud reminds the reader that the rule associating mas- 
culine with activity, feminine with passivity is not always borne out by observation of 
the animal world, and that in human maternity the female is to some extent active Cgiv- 
ing suck, etc.). His reservation about the generalization, however, is only that it is some- 
what too sweeping and imprecise. Of its essential validity he appears to have no real doubt, 
since on its premise he has built a large number of his contentions: the label "phallic" 
for the autoerotic stage in females, the constitutional passivity of women, the masculine 
character of the libido, etc. See "Femininity," pp. 114-15, Chapter 4 of Civilization and 
Its Discontents (1930) and "The Transformation of Puberty." The following statement 
is a good description of Freud's practice in working with these definitions: ". . . psycho- 
analysis cannot elucidate the intrinsic nature of what in conventional or in biological 
phraseology is termed 'masculine' and 'feminine': it simply takes over the two concepts 
and makes them the foundation of its work." "The Psychogenesis of a Case of Homo- 
sexuality in a Woman" Coilecteii Papers of Sigmund Freud (London; Hogarth, 1920), 
pp. 202-3. 

05 "The male sex-eel] is actively mobile and searches out the female one, and the 
latter, the ovum, is immobile and waits passively. The behavior of the elementary sexual 
organisms is indeed a model for the conduct of sexual individuals during intercourse." 
"Femininity," p. 114. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



191 



ra l and subject to endless cross-cultural variation, Freud somewhat precipi- 
tously equates such behavior with inherency, with the biologically inevitable, 
and finally arrives at prescriptive conformity to a social norm built upon what 
he believes to be an anatomical base. 

To accommodate the many disturbing exceptions to sexual temperamental 
norms Freud made use of a sliding scale of gradation and variation of mascu- 
line and feminine, with Platonic ideals at either end, probably borrowed 
from Weininger. To this he added the theory of bisexuality. Bisexuality could 
be invoked, as Freud explained, when dealing with "ladies" who "whenever 
some comparison turned out to be unfavorable to their sex were able to utter 
a suspicion that we, the male analysts, had been unable to overcome cer- 
tain deeply-rooted prejudices against what was feminine and this was being 
paid for in the partiality of our researches." Freud then informs the reader 
how he responded: "Standing on the ground of bisexuality, we had no diffi- 
culty in avoiding impoliteness. We had only to say: This does not apply to 
you. You're the exception; on this point you are more masculine than femi- 
nine. 1 " 98 Women who dispute logic are called men for their pains. Arid since 
the sexual-temperamental differentiation is, although supported by behavioral 
differences which constitute social norms, still thought by Freudians to be 
physiological in origin, to say that a female is not feminine is merely con- 
fusing. Nor does the theory of bisexuality provide much relief to the indi- 
vidual since femininity is forcefully prescribed and praised as the mature 
resolution of the child's bisexual dilemma. 

On a number of occasions Freud allowed that masculine and feminine in 
their pure form are theoretical constructs of uncertain character. 67 He fur- 
ther allows, as most social science has done since-to insidious effect-for over- 
lap and graduated patterns. Yet the general effect of Freudian thought was, 
despite the theory of bisexuality, to equate, even to prescribe, what it de- 
fines as masculine with the biological male, feminine with the biological 
female. By 1933, when he came to write his definitive work on the subject, 
"Femininity" Freud had come to define the feminine as a "preference" for 
passive aims, or to put it in his own somewhat paradoxical phrase "the ac- 
tive pursuit of a passive function." 68 Freud had gradually rejected his earlier 
hypothesis that feminine temperament might be largely formed by the effect 
of learning processes and social pressure and, though still sometimes acknowl- 
edging in passing a social component, went further and further in identify- 
ing "feminine" attributes with "constitutional" "instinctive" or genetic 
tendencies." 

80 "Femininity," pp. 1 16-17. 

87 "Female Sexuality," p. 197 and elsewhere. 

98 "Fernininity," p. 1 15- , . , . 

fiSEven as late as 1933: "The suppression of women's aggressiveness wnicn is pre- 
scribed for them constitutionally and imposed on them socially, favors the development 
of powerful masochistic impulses." "Feminiiuty," p. 116. The sentence is by no means 



192 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



In the work of Freud, and still more in that of his disciples, it is generally 
assumed that masculine and feminine arc analogous to male and female, and 
deviance from either norm is regarded as symptomatic of mental malady ac- 
cording to degree. Yet if the first assumption were in fact true, there should 
have been less need to make masculine and feminine also prescriptive, as they 
came to be with such overpowering force in the counterrevolutionary period 
when divergence was considered not only unhealthy but even vicious. One 
might even argue that if masculine and feminine are, or are related to, nat- 
ural or constitutional products, all behavior on the part of a male is mascu- 
line, on the part of a female feminine. Removed from their contexts of social 
behavior, where they function to maintain an order not only of differentia- 
tion but of dominance and subordinance, the words "masculine" and "femi- 
nine" mean nothing at all and might well be replaced with what is biologically 
or naturally verifiable— male and female. 

Very early, in 1905, Freud defined the libido (a term which denotes far 
more than sexual drive and for practical purposes is roughly equivalent to 
the life force or to every variety of human energy) as masculine "regularly 
and lawfully of a masculine nature whether in the man or in the 
woman." 100 This not only seems to invalidate the theory of bisexuality, but 
gives one some insight into the Victorian character of Freud's own sexual 
attitudes, through its assumption that sexual activity is "for men." In 1923 
he shifted ground a bit and conceded that the libido had no sex. 101 Yet 
he appears to go right on seeing it as a masculine function with enormous 
cultural and creative possibilities, a species of life force and male property 
nearly exclusively. Complementing this was Freud's feeling that culture was 
in general inimical to sexuality; if one were to devote oneself to "higher" 
pursuits, one must renounce, or at any rate, sublimate sexuality. Since, by 
his definition, women have very low libido ("woman is endowed with a 
weaker sexual instinct") 102 and so cannot pursue civilization, sublimation 
means, practically speaking, that the male, whose higher libido equips him 
for it, must shun the temptations afforded by the female and go on to loftier 
goals. 103 



clear as to Low each force operates— social or constitutional— and to what proportional 
extent. But it does support the general Freudian assumption that, in regard to the female, 
social imposition only supports or reinforces organic conditions. 

100 Freud, Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex (1908), Basic Writings o\ 
Sigmund Freud, edited by A. A. Brill (New York, Random House, Modern Library, 
1938), pp. 612-13. 

101 Freud, "The Infantile Genital Organization of the Libido" (1013) Collected 
Papers, Vol. II. 

10S "'Civilized' Sexual Morality and Modern Nervousness" (iooS), Collected Pavers, 
Vol. II, p. 87. 

103 The belief in a stronger sexual drive in males has traditionally been put forward 
to justify the double standard. To the Victorians this was proof of the female's "higher" 
nature; in Freud it becomes proof of her lower nature, as the amount of sublimated libido 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



*93 



At a time when "instinctual" forces were highly regarded, Freud entrusted 
not only human culture but the preservation of the human race to the male: 

Nature has paid less careful attention to the demands of the female function 
than to those of masculinity . . . the achievement of the biological aim is en- 
trusted to the aggressiveness of the male, and is to some extent independent of 
the cooperation of the female. 104 

A later translator is more explicit and expresses the last phrase as "inde- 
pendent of the woman's consent." The very male libido is now to be re- 
spected as a power in the service of life and must be permitted to wreak its 
will on the female whether she has the wit to co-operate or not. The frigid 
woman (and Freud studied a great many of them) is brought on as an 
example of the male's superior regard for posterity. Nature, Freud concludes, 
has simply neglected to provide the female with a forceful libido; what hap- 
pens then is her fault. The whole balance of male sexual aggression toward 
the female is hereby subsumed under a huge abstract force only concerned 
with the continuation of the species. This attitude gave rise to a whole battery 
of military diction which psychology has ever since employed to describe 
sexuality: surrender, dominance, mastery. 

The male pursues the female for the purposes of sexual union, seizes hold of 
her and penetrates into her ... by this you have precisely reduced the charac- 
teristic of masculinity to the factor of aggressiveness. 105 

It is not very difficult once this type of language has gained respectability 
for writers affected by the Freudian point of view to deprecate a less belli- 
cose mating as tepid, epicene, or prissy. 

The emphasis on procreational instinct is curiously at odds with Freud's 
pronouncements on other occasions when he makes it clear that procreation 
is far from the only or even the nearest reason for sexual desire: ". . . the 
sexual instinct in man does not originally serve the purposes of procreation, 
but has as its aim the gain of a particular kind of pleasure." 10 ' 1 Living in 
an age when female frigidity or hyposexuality was widespread Freud did 
not fully understand its social implications, not merely those of guilt or a 

predicts the amount of cultural potentiality. He has combined the privileges of a freer 
sexual expression always accorded to males with traditional assertion of the male's su- 
periority in the intellectual and cultural sphere. 

104 This is from the first English translation of "Femininity," entitled "The Psychology 
of Women," in W. J. H. Sprott's translation (1933), the second phrase is from Stia- 
chey's "Femininity" translation (p. 131) used, with this exception throughout. 

105 "Femininity," pp. 1 14-15. After sketching this caricature, Freud himself admits 
that one does not "gain any advantage" from using the terms masculinity and femininity 
thus— for the same reasons alleged in footnote 94. His followers were rarely or never 
this forbearing. 

loo " 'Civilized' Sexual Morality and Modern Nervousness," p. 83. 



194 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



negative attitude toward sexuality, but those of female resistance as well. 
He appears to have accepted frigidity as further evidence in some degree 
at least, of a lesser libidinous energy, finding its incidence in many cases 
"constitutional." 107 He concluded with the simple formula that the female 
does not "hunger" for sex to the extent that the male does and her lower 
sexual drive then must be "organic." The recent research of Masters and 
Johnson has done a great deal to rule out this prim conclusion, but the sup- 
position falls in line with other "Victorian" notions Freud never relinquished. 

Ill 

The three most distinguishing traits of female personality, were, in Freud's 
view, passivity, masochism, and narcissism. Even here, one can see a certain 
merit in the Freudian paradigm taken as pure description. The position of 
women in patriarchy is such that they are expected to be passive, to suffer, 
and to be sexual objects; it is unquestionable that they are, with varying 
degrees of success, socialized into such roles. This is not however what 
Freud had in mind. Nor had he any intention of describing social circum- 
stances. Instead, he believed that the elaborate cultural construction we call 
"femininity" was largely organic, e.g., identical with, or clearly related to, 
femaleness. 108 He therefore proceeded to define femininity as constitu- 
tional passivity, masochism, and narcissism. He also prescribed it as the norm 
not only of genera] development, but of healthy development. The leading 
feminine characteristic, passivity, is achieved for example "with the abandon- 
ment of clitoridal masturbation" and the onset of maternal craving in the 
Oedipal stage, and this upsurge of femininity is "accompanied principally 
with the help of passive instinctual impulses." 1 ™ 

Masochism and passivity, Fieud would have us understand, are not only 
both feminine but dynamically interrelated: masochism comprises all pas- 
sive attitudes to sexual life and object. 110 It is therefore normal in females, 
abnormal in males. He also provides another general description by saying 
that in masochism "the subject is placed in a situation characteristic of 
womanhood, i.e., they mean that he is being castrated, is playing the passive 
role in coitus, or is giving birth." 111 Masochism is female; femininity is 
masochistic. It is ingenious to describe masochism and suffering as inherently 
feminine. Not only does it express masculine attitudes toward female func- 
tions (they are painful, degrading, etc.), it justifies any conceivable domina- 
tion or humiliation forced upon the female as mere food for her nature. To 

107 "Sometimes it [frigidity] is psychogenic and in that case accessible to influence; 
but in other cases it suggests the hypothesis of its being constitutionally determined and 
even of there being a contributing anatomical factor." "Femininity," p. 132. 

108 See a ] so preceding footnote where even frigidity is thought to be constitutional. 
i<» "Femininity," p. 128 (italics mine). 

110 Freud, "The Economic Problems of Masochism" (1924), Collected. Papers, Vol. II. 
i" Ibid., p. 258. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 19s 

carry such a notion to its logical conclusion, abuse is not only good for woman 
but the very thing she craved; The Story of O is an extreme statement made 
upon such assumptions. No better rationalization could be found for con- 
tinuing to punish the victim. As an added attraction cruelty is erotic since it 
fulfills both partners' natures. Nearly any atrocity committed against woman 
may eventually be extenuated on the theory of her innate masochism. Freud 
might have been appalled had he dwelt on the full possibilities of such an 
attribution to this or any other disadvantaged group. 

Of the three varieties of masochism Freud outlined— "erotogenic," "moral," 
an d "feminine," he merged two, the feminine with the erotogenic's "lust 
for pain," which he admitted is in itself difficult to explain, even in women. 
Hinting at the inscrutable, the inexplicable-a favorite technique when dis- 
cussing woman— Freud hovers provocatively over such ideas as "some secret 
relationship with masochism" and titillates us with reports of an appetite for 
pain which "remains incomprehensible unless one can bring oneself to make 
certain assumptions about matters that are veiled in obscurity." 112 

Freud is sure, however that pain is enjoyable to the masochist, and he 
appears to be equally sure that coitus must be painful to the female; this 
seems to be his only evidence that females enjoy heterosexual intercourse. 113 
For the rest, Freud is not far from agreement with Acton, a nineteenth- 
century physician whose famous dictum is often quoted in evidence of the 
Victorian attitude that any attribution of sexual pleasure to women was a 
"vile aspersion." Freud even hoped to cast this in scientific terms by positing 
"a general female tendency to ward off sexuality." 11 * The notion that 
woman's role in coitus is passive and therefore masochistic, its only delight 
in enduring pain, while a very revealing projection of masculine attitude 
toward the female situation in intercourse, is unlikely to be the source of 
further wisdom. 

Freud appears to believe not only that masochism is "feminine" but that 
it accords with a woman's position in marriage which he denominated as 
"thralldom," an adjective not without some ironic justification in view of the 
legal position of women. Yet, notwithstanding his moving description of 
defloration customs which place the vulnerable virgin bride in the position of 
"sexual thralldom," "dependent and helpless," he appears to see nothing to 
object to in the system or in its proceedings. In this situation the female re- 
sponds, as Freud expects, with "thralldom and gTatitude," although disap- 

112 Ibid., p. 257. 

113 Fieud describes the "lust for pain" as an expression of femininity, a concept which 
"can be supported on biological and constitutional grounds." (Ibid.') Further, that this 
pain is the nature of female sexual experience: "sexual excitation arises as an accessory 
effect of a large series of internal processes as soon as the intensity o£ these processes has 
exceeded certain quantitative limits ... an excitation of physical pain and feelings would 
surely have this effect." Even when masochism occurs in males it is a "form of masochism 
a potiori feminine." Ibid., p. 259 and p. 258. 

114 Fieud, "The Taboo of Virginity" (1918), Collected Payers, Vol. IV, p. 218. 



ip6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



pointed and in pain, suffering a second wound in addition to the sorrows of 
her first castration, and knowing too that she is diminished in value because 
no more a virgin. 11!i All this is customary and well enough, unless she so 
forgets her position as to respond with hostility, or attempts to transcend her 
role, a response Freud interprets as a desire to "castrate" the male in revenge. 
Just as with women who show signs of "masculinity complex" or "masculine 
protest" Freudian theory mobilizes itself against the threat of insubordinate 
women, specifically stipulated as "emancipated" or intellectual, whose penis 
envy has gone beyond the knowledge of unworthiness and whose new edu- 
cational privileges have alienated them from their "instinctual" nature. All 
the forces of psychoanalysis came to be gathered to force woman to "adjust" 
to her position, that is to accept it and submit, for the security of society 
and the strength of traditional marriage depend upon her accepting her 
fate. 

Having satisfied himself that masochism is genetically female, founded 
both on constitutional affinity and unchangeable psychological nature, Freud 
advises his students, "if as happens so often you meet with masochism in 
man, what is left to you but to say that these men exhibit very plainly 
feminine traits." 110 As such, they are neurotic in some measure. Despite 
the hypothesis that we are all, to some degree, bisexual, one is made to grow 
anxious when males display feminine traits, just as masculine traits are un- 
becoming to females, evidence of penis envy. It is remarkable how Freudian 
prescription tends to ignore its own notion of bisexuality or to find symptoms 
of it as backsliding. 

Having established passivity and masochism, Freud proceeds to the third 
of his "feminine" triad— narcissism. Like the categories of medieval scholas- 
ticism, it is divided into two headings. The first is the feminine form, which 
although natural to women, is nevertheless denominated a "perversion." 117 
It involves the female's investment of her love in her own body or her self, 
treating it in the same way as the male would respond to it. Male narcissism, 
called anaclitic, is of a higher type and sounds more like admiration of others 
than vanity over self. Narcissism in the male is only the process of over- 
estimating an idealized woman by projecting unto her the male's own finest 
traits. Narcissistic men improve upon their love object, narcissistic women 
persist in an inferior form of affection, not rising to the altruism of "object- 
love." 118 A good deal of this is a reworking of Weininger's remarks on love 

115 Ibid. The entire description is summarized from the article, esp. pp. 227-28. 
lie "Femininity," p. 132. 

117 Freud, "On Narcissism, An Introduction" (191 4), Collected Papers, Vol. IV. p. 30 
and p. 46. Freud remarks that the same tendency is observed to occur in homosexuals 
and megalomaniacs; but in women one expects it. 

118 ". . . the anaclitic type is, properly speaking, characteristic of the man. It displays 
the marked sexual over-estimation which is derived from the original narcissism of the 
child, now transferred to the sexual object" (e.g., the beloved woman who replaces the 
maternal figure). Ibid., p. 45. "A different course if followed in the type most frequently 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



197 



and the idealization of women in literature, notably Dante's Beatrice. De- 
spite woman's intrinsic lesser worth, a man who can create fine poetry by 
turning her into an idea leaves us all so much better off. As for that vast ma- 
jority of women who do not live on pedestals, Freud realizes it is psychologi- 
cally necessary for men to debase them in prostitution and brutalized 
sexuality, and thus we arrive at "The Most Prevalent Form of Degradation 
in Erotic Life." 

Narcissism is not only constitutionally female, it is also produced by penis 
envy: "The effect of penis-envy has a share, further, in the physical vanity 
of women, since they are bound to value their charms more highly as a 
late compensation for their original sexual inferiority." 119 Even woman's 
beauty is but another symptom of the need to be born with a penis. One grows 
to pity Freud's condition. If carried far, the female might grow too engrossed 
in her narcissism and exclude males altogether from her affection. Freud's 
attitude on the subject is both resigned (it's her nature) and prescriptive 
(women must control their vanity). 

In convincing himself that the three traits of femininity were in fact con- 
stitutional and biologically destined, Freud had made it possible to prescribe 
them and for his followers to attempt to enforce them, perpetuating a condi- 
tion which originates in oppressive social circumstances. To observe a 
group rendered passive, stolid in their suffering, forced into trivial vanity to 
please their superordinates, and, after summarizing these effects of long sub- 
ordination, choose to conclude they were inevitable, and then commence to 
prescribe them as health, realism, and maturity, is actually a fairly blatant 
kind of Social Darwinism. As a manner of dealing with deprived groups, it 
is hardly new, but it has rarely been so successful as Freudian ism has been 
in dealing with women. 

IV 

It is difficult to continue to describe the female as an incomplete male 
without eventually concerning oneself with the quality of intellect in a crea- 
ture so curtailed. Freud's early interpretation of what he regarded as the 
undeveloped feminine intellect was that it was due to social inhibitions on 
her sexuality which in turn inhibited all other mental effort. 120 As the fe- 
male's greatest interest was sex, he reasoned— feeling no contradiction with 

met with in women, which is the purest and truest feminine type . . . this is unfavorable 
to the development of a true object love . . . there arises in the woman a certain self- 
sufficiency (especially when there is a ripening of beauty) . . . stricdy speaking such 
women love only themselves with an intensity comparable to that of the man's love for 
them. Nor does their need lie in the direction of loving, but of being loved." Ibid., p. 46. 
Women relinquish this sort of narcissism by creating love-objects in children. It is par- 
ticularly interesting how this whole formulation has avoided the issue of personal vanity 
or egotism in men. 

119 "Femininity," p. 132. 

120 " 'Civilized' Sexual Morality and Modern Nervousness," p. 94. 



198 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



his repeated stress that she had little sex drive or pleasure— and since this 
was the one subject she is forbidden to study, terrorized on all sides that her 
"greatest thirst for knowledge" might end in the "pronouncement that 
such curiosity is inwardly a sign of immoral tendency," she can only inhibit 
and repress, rarely sublimate and transcend. Intimidated from pursuing the 
strongest interest she is capable of entertaining, the young woman is soon di- 
rected away from any study and soon "all mental effort and knowledge in 
genera] is depreciated in their eyes." 121 And so the mere fact of sexual re- 
pression at first seemed sufficient cause for what Freud took to be the mani- 
festly inferior mentality of the female; ". . , the undoubted fact of the in- 
tellectual inferiority of so many women can be traced to that inhibition of 
thought necessitated by sexual suppression." 122 One is edified not only by 
the safety-valve phrase "so many women," but by the confused fatalism of 
"necessitated," 

These remarks were made in 1908 when, still a young man, Freud was 
willing to contradict Moebius' contention that the female was inherently in- 
ferior in mental ability, and was still willing to attribute a certain amount of 
female resistance to her situation, however euphemized as "conflict," etc., 
to social and educational factors— cultural rather than inherent biological 
or psychological elements. As the years went by Freud underwent a con- 
siderable change of attitude in respect to this question and grew to have a 
greater and greater need of stronger formulations to convince us that the fe- 
male character is a static thing ordained by Nature and the unalterable laws 
of her anatomy. Inferior, vice-ridden, half savage; she comes to be seen as 
all this simply by virtue of her deformed, castrated physiology. 

Since the possibility of social factors in regard to woman's relation to 
human culture and intellectual achievement did not satisfy him very long, 
Freud desired surer evidence that woman fails to contribute to civilization 
not because she is prevented but because she is constitutionally incapable 
of doing so. Proof of such came to be supplied by Freud's description of 
female psycho-organic development through the stages of infancy and ado- 
lescence. 

Freud may take large credit for the lucrative either/or controversy between 
the clitoris and the vagina which has provided careers and put bread on the 
table for an army of disciples in the past three decades. 123 Freud himself 
thought the basic female organ was the clitoris, not the vagina. But he is just 
as confident that the female could only achieve "normal" and "mature" sex- 

121 Ihid. 

122 Ihid. 

123 See the history of the "vaginal orgasm" by Daniel Brown, "Female Orgasm and 
Sexual Inadequacy," reprinted in Edward and Ruth Biecher's Human Sexual Response 
(New York: New American Library, 1966), pp. 125-75. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



199 



uality through the vagina, renouncing the clitoris. 124 Herein lies the dilemma. 
Clearly the woman's task is to transfer her sexuality from clitoris to vagina— 
a difficult passage in which Freud foresaw that many women might go astray. 
Even among the successful the project has consumed so much of their pro- 
ductive youth that their minds stagnate. And so the intellectual inferiority 
f women of which Freud was so comfortably convinced is explained on 
what are, finally, biological grounds. In between the child's early clitoroidal 
masturbation, which Freud would have us believe ceases at the discovery of 
her castration and the onset of penis envy, cowing her so that she henceforth 
inhibits all sexual activity until the defloration and penetration of her first 
experience of coitus, the major part of normal female youth was, as Freud 
would suggest it be, spent in a sexual limbo. The result is what a prurient 
patriarchy has always found so desirable, the virginal maiden utterly unsex- 
ual to herself. While he occasionally catalogued the ill effects of official moral- 
ity, Freud did not' seriously question the basis of patriarchal family life nor 
the necessity, occasionally unfortunate (but always attractive), for a chaste 
and sexually inactive young womanhood to be preserved. 1 " 5 Champion of 
the correctly passive type of feminine sexual fulfillment, Freud is also capable 
of lapsing into accounts of the charms of a relatively frigid or narcissistic 
womanhood in a vaguely archaic vein. The male appetite and attitude is 
clearly his chief referent and consideration. One recalls Reich's anecdote 
of the nineteenth-century gentleman's disgusted reprimand to his enthusiastic 
bride: "Ladies don't move." 

In Freudian terms, there are three hurdles to female development-trans- 
ference from one 20ne to another (clitoroidal to vaginal), replacement of 
the first sex object (mother) with the second (father), and the tediously ines- 
capable factor of penis envy. Should the female lapse into "pathological 
regression" (an affinity for clitoral stimulation)" 6 it is hardly to be won- 
dered at with so many pitfalls all about her. The male program of transferring 
his love from mother to another woman is seen as a happy and uncompli- 
cated continuum. Freud has a relatively complete system of answers for 
all female "maladjustment" to the masculine society she inhabits; somewhere 

'^ Freud, "Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, The Transformations of Pu- 
berty" Bask Writings of Sigmund Freud, pp. 613-14 and elsewhere. ". . .the sexual 
function of manv women is crippled by their obstinately clinging to this clitoris excitabil- 
ity." "On the Sexual Theories of Children" Ci9°8), Collected Popers, Vol. II, p. 67. 
Freud's theory that the clitoris is a vestigial stunted penis is not only inaccurate but even, 
it now seems, directly contrary to fact. Recent embryological research leads to the con- 
clusion that the female is the race type-e.g., that all embryos begin as girls until a 
number, through the operation of androgen in their chromosomal structure, differentiate 
themselves into males and commence to grow the penis. 

izo " 'Civilized' Sexual Morality" and elsewhere. In this article Freud states expressly 
that excessive inhibition (i.e., presumably beyond that needed to keep them chaste) may 
cause frigidity or vaginal anesthesia in brides. His recommendation is not premarital 
intercourse for women, but second marriages. 

126 "Female Sexuality," pp. 255-57. 



200 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



the offender has missed a hurdle. All protest is a futile struggle against her 
own nature and her identity, a masculinity complex, a masculine protest, 
corroding penis envy, or immaturity. Since activity in women which is not 
sexual (or rather, reproductive and maternal) is some evidence of penis 
envy or masculine protest, it is already suspect. And as "feminine nature" 
is only fulfilled through the renunciation of "masculine" or intellectual pur- 
suits, it is unbecoming, even some sign of neurotic maladjustment, for women 
to attempt them. 

Vet Freud's intent is not only to limit female life to the sexual-reproductive, 
but also to persuade us that women live at a low cultural level because this is 
the only one of which they are capable. There must, therefore, be better as- 
surance of woman's cultural incapacity than mere scolding over "masculine 
protest." Might it be, Freud pondered, that because women have such a big 
responsibility to the race that they have no surplus energy left for "higher" 
things? This is happily conservative, in that it appears to salute motherhood, 
while tying the woman to a mere biological existence. 127 

This position has much to recommend in it, but perhaps it is not quite 
invidious enough. Freud finally concluded with evident gratification that 
here again the answer should lie in the facile and well worn but seemingly 
irrefutable business of organic constitution. Women have contributed little to 
civilization; it follows that they are incapable of contributing at all. For 
civilization is made through sublimation, and "women, as the true guardians 
of the race, are endowed with the power of sublimation only in a limited 
degree." 128 Moreover, as Freud emphasized, the female since she is not re- 
quired, as is the male, to conceal and transcend her Oedipal complex for 
fear of castration (she has been through this surgery once and nothing worse 
can befall her) fails to develop sufficient super ego. 129 Man makes his con- 
tribution to civilization through sublimation and the development of a strong 
super ego goaded on by fear of castration-as a result of possessing a penis- 
and the fear of losing it. Never having had a penis and so, unafraid to lose 
it, the female has far less super ego than the male. This is why, Freud ex- 
plains, she is largely without moral sense, inclined to be less ethically rigor- 
ous, has little perception of justice, submits easily to the necessities of life, 
is more subject to emotional bias in judgment, and contributes nothing to 

127 S ee Freud's Civilization and Its Discontents (London, Hogarth Press, 1930), 
12 « " 'Civilized' Sexual Morality," p. 78. The flummery about "guardians of the race" 
being incapable of sublimating sexual instinct is odd in the light of Freud's belief that 
women have so little sexual instinct to sublimate anyway. The method he recommends 
for their minimal needs is, predictably, that of maternity. 

120 "Femininity." See pages 119, 125, and 129-also "Female Sexuality." "The for- 
mation of the super ego must suffer; it cannot attain the strength and independence which 
give it its cultural significance, and feminists are not pleased when we point out to the 
effects of this factor on the average feminine character." 'Tenrininity," p. 119. "Character- 
traits which critics of every epoch have brought against women" are due to the failure of 
the super ego, despite the "denials of the feminists." "Female Sexuality," p. 197. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 201 

high culture. Again her inferiority— real now and not childishly imagined— 
is the result of her lack of a penis. With a penis, one might have acquired 
moral understanding and contribute to human progress, art, and civilization. 
In fact, it appears that girls who believe in the superiority of the penis, are— 
by all Freud's "proof," entirely correct. 

Civilization, we are informed, is created through sublimation, or, in a 
more recondite Freudian phrase "instinctual renunciation," and again, this 
is the result of development which, due to her psychological history and 
physiological constitution the female is, for want of a penis, incapable of 
achieving. One of Freud's happiest thoughts along this line is an entertaining 
specimen of his logical processes, and a particularly quaint instance of his 
unflagging enthusiasm for glorifying the inestimable male organ. Speculating 
on how man discovered fire, Freud concludes that it was the result of "in- 
stinctual renunciation" of the impulse to extinguish the fire by urinating on 
it. It must be perfectly clear to all that the female could not discover fire 
because she could not renounce the impulse to urinate on it, lacking as she 
does the only adequate organ of long-distance urination. Here one has an 
extreme and pristine case of how, anatomically, woman is disqualified from 
contributing to the advancement of knowledge, 130 

While he continued to toy with the notion that her biological responsibil- 
ity to the race impeded the female intellect, Freud progressed to an even 
more negative position; together with her inherent and psychological incapac- 
ities, the female's "sexual role," the function that defines her in life and 
in the family (Freud regarded the patriarchal family's emergence out of the 
primal horde as one of civilization's achievements) has made her not only in- 
competent, but necessarily hostile to intellect and high culture, a type of 
natural philistine: 



Women represent the interests of the family and the sexual life; the work of 
civilization has become more and more men's business; it confronts them with 
ever harder tasks, compels them to sublimations of instinct which women are 
not easily able to achieve. Since man has not an unlimited amount of mental 
energy at his disposal, he must accomplish his tasks by distributing his libido 
to the best advantage. What he employs for cultural purposes he withdraws to a 
great extent from women and his sexual life; his constant association with men 
and his dependence on his relations with them even estrange him from his 
duties as husband and father. Woman finds herself thus forced into the back- 
ground by the claims of culture and she adopts an inimical attitude towards 
it"! 

Through the sober wisdom of CiviZiznfiow and Its Discontents Freud warns 
against the regressive effect of the female, inferior to the male in social in- 

13u Civilization and Its Discontents, pp. 50-51, footnote one. See also "The Acquisi- 
tion of Power over Fire" (1932). Collected Papers, Vol. V. 
131 Ibid., p. 73. 



202 SEXUAL POLITICS 

stinct, imbued with the selfishness of her all-sufficient relationship with lover 
and family around which she is compelled (in order to fulfill her nature) 
to build her life. The male invests his time and libido in civilized pursuits- 
the female comes increasingly to view civilization as her rival. Despite the 
fact that she has little sexual instinct to suppress, her ability to sublimate 
and renounce is minimal or negligible, and as civilization requires more and 
more that one do so, the woman may be said to be constitutionally unfitted 
for civilized life and therefore finds it hard to progress, or presumably, 
even to keep up with and stay in human society. This view of woman as a 
species unalterably primitive is remarkably popular in our century; a staple 
in modern literary attempts to invent romantic fantasies of primeval ver- 
ities. But one may also, with Freud, see her as a surly savage, a drag on any 
social amelioration, an unassimilated tribeswoman. 

On another occasion, when speaking of the success of psychotherapy in 
the case of a man over thirty who became "creative" through treatment, 
Freud regretted that women of the same age are rigid and incapable of 
growth, their characters having long before responded to their limited nat- 
ural patterns. Although "an individual woman may be a human being in 
other respects as well" one must remember Freud warns that "their nature is 
determined by their sexual function" and that "that influence extends very 
far." 132 In woman's case it extends far enough to place her in a category one 
might, in general, term infra-human. Such is the effect of the "anatomy is 
destiny" formula; it has the incontestable force of primate limitations. 

In another age, it might have been easy to excuse Freud on the grounds of 
a particularly severe patriarchal upbringing, but his most influential work 
was done in the first three decades of the twentieth century, much of it 'in 
the very midst of the sexual revolution. There was, therefore, plenty of his- 
torical information, and a whole climate of opinion at hand to assist him in re- 
covering from a male-supremacist bias. In reply to feminist critics (and he 
was continually beset by them during these years) Freud conceded nothing, 
or responded with irrelevant banter, amused to acknowledge that not all 
men are paragons of masculinity, and that some women can nearly attain 
the characteristic virtues of masculinity, unseemly and misguided though they 
be to do so. 133 Somewhat analogously, other forms of prejudice are eager to 
concede an exceptional peasant or Negro or native; this confirms the rule. Re- 
fusing to debate the matter seriously, Freud took refuge in a circular tautol- 
ogy: when attacked for masculine prejudice, he responded by accusing his 
detractors of defensiveness, claiming they were male-oriented in aspiring 
to objectivity. He himself seemed incapable of imagining objectivity as a non- 
masculine related quality. Freud is not only confident his opponents were 

132 "Femininity," p. 135. 

133 "Some Psychological Consequences o£ the Anatomical Distinctions Between the 
Sexes," p. 197. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



203 



wrong in believing otherwise, but that his own theoretical model of the de- 
bilitated female super-ego proved them wrong. 134 

The lines of influence which psychoanalysis will exercise over sexual pol- 
itics are set; generations of practitioners will follow, reputable or ridiculous. 
Yet more effective even than penis envy is the school's tendency toward a 
pseudoscientific unification of the cultural definition of masculinity and 
femininity with the genetic reality of male and female. Dressing the thing 
up in jargon— "passivity," 'low libido," "masochism," "narcissism," "undevel- 
oped super ego"— one gives the old myth of feminine "nature" a new re- 
spectability. Now it can be said scientifically that women are inherently sub- 
servient, and males dominant, more strongly sexed and therefore entitled to 
sexually subjugate the female, who enjoys her oppression and deserves it, 
for she is by her very nature, vain, stupid, and hardly better than barbarian, 
if she is human at all. Once this bigotry has acquired the cachet of science, 
the counterrevolution may proceed pretty smoothly. Sex, like race, is some- 
thing one cannot really change. It is a sign of a rather superior female to 
wish herself out of such a case, seeing and aspiring to the virtues of the 
ruling group. But it is futile to hope to escape one's birth caste. Aspiration 
on the part of the truly incapacitated only forbodes frustration. And, after 
all, psychoanalysis promised fulfillment in passivity and masochism, and 
greater fulfillment, indeed, the very meaning of woman's life lay in reproduc- 
tion, and there alone. Then too, in venal hands, psychoanalysis could not 
only discredit the revolution and turn it back, but give work, make money, 
sell itself and consumerism as well. 130 



Some Post-Freudians 



In general, Freudian psychology would posit an irreducible human nature, 
an essential and universal human psychology; the Oedipus complex should 
develop in matriarchal or communal society as well as in patriarchal; penis 
envy in a sexually egalitarian as well as in a male-supremacist culture. Its 
tendency is to view each personality as the result not of individual choices 
or social conditions, nor as the interaction of the two, but as the product of a 
childhood biography imposed upon inherent constitution by parental be- 
havior. Finally, having misapprehended the physiological data it claims to be 
based on, it imagines sexual temperament to be the function of biology (mas- 
culine is active, feminine is passive) and genetics (the activity and passivity 

134 See "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinctions Between 
the Sexes" (p. 197) and "Female Sexuality" (pp. 281-82). 

135 B e tty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique furnishes a good deal of convincing evi- 
dence that psychoanalytic thought was exploited by the greedy manipulations of "market 
research" for the most cynical economic ends. See Chapter Nine, "The Sexual Sell." 



204 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



of the sperm and ova). Having done all this, it concludes that sexual status 
role, and temperament are fixed entities— that culture is based upon anatomy, 
and must, therefore, be destiny. 

As this point of view not only pervaded later psychoanalysis but insinuated 
itself into the other social sciences, many of Freud's own followers began to 
take some note of social factors; some, like Karen Homey and Clara Thomp- 
son, attempted to revise Freudian theory in recognition of the social condi- 
tions of the sexes. But the essential line of theoretical orientation had been 
set. While some might demur or take exception to Freud's psychology of 
women, others embraced it and carried it still further. In either case a definite 
trend of influence had been set in motion which was reactionary in effect, for 
even gainsayers could not go beyond adjustive revision. 

Two early and prominent enunciators of Freudian theory were Marie 
Bonaparte and Helene Deutsch. In a chapter entitled "Essential Feminine 
Masochism," Bonaparte carries the potentially malevolent aspect of a 
Freudian view of sexual intercourse to its logical conclusion: 

Throughout the whole range of living creatures, animal or vegetal, passivity is 
characteristic of the female cell, the ovum whose mission is to await the male 
cell, the active mobile spermatazoan to come and -penetrate it. Such penetra- 
tion, however, implies infraction of its tissue, but infraction of a living creature's 
tissue may entail destruction: death as much as life. Thus, the fecundation of 
the female cell is initiated by a kind of wound; in its way, the female cell is 
ptimordially "masochistic." 1510 

In keeping with this fancy of sexuality as lethal assault, the infant male is 
presented with histrionic brutality: 

What the small boy apparently yearns to accomplish is an anal, cloaca!, in- 
testinal penetration of the mother; a bloody disembowelling even. The child 
of two, three, or four, despite, or rather because of, its infancy, is truly then a 
potential Jack the Ripper, 137 

While the young male is given over to such violent self-expression, we 
are told that the girl can only lay claim to a self-assertion as truncated as 
the clitoris, her phallus, whose very size "dooms her aggression" : I38 

Constitutionally, no doubt, female aggression, like her libido, is generally 
weaker than the male's . . . Boys' constitutionally stronger aggression . . , 
partly determines the male's superiority. 130 

las Marie Bonaparte, Female Sexuality (New York, Grove Press, 1965), pp. 75-80. 
First published by International Universities Press, 1953. 
»? Ibid., p. 80. 
138 Ibid., p. 82. 
™»lbid., p. 8r. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



20 s 



While the male "must protest" against the "passive attitude," since it is not 
"biologically imposed on him," both passivity and masochism "vntst be ac- 
cepted by the female" upon whom they are biologically imposed, 140 and 
whose life is necessarily unpleasant: 

All forms of masochism are related, and in essence, more or less female, from 
the wish to be eaten by the father in the cannibalistic oral phase, through that 
of being whipped or beaten by him in the sadistic-anal stage, and of being cas- 
trated in the phallic stage, to the wish, in the adult feminine stage, to be 
pierced. 141 

Miss Bonaparte, whose own predilections one has little trouble in deducing 
from her work, takes a strongly prescriptive line with regard to female maso- 
chism. Taking off from Freud's essay "A Child Is Being Beaten," she adds— 
"or a woman"— and rei r eals that flagellation is but healthy intercourse: 

Vaginal sensitivity in coitus for the adult female, in my opinion, is thus largely 
based on the existence, and more or less unconscious, acceptation of the child's 
immense masochistic beating fantasies. In coitus, the woman, in effect, is sub- 
jected to a sort of beating by the man's penis. She receives its blows and often, 
even, loves their violence. This sensitivity must be a deep and truly vaginal 
sensitivity to the blows of the penis. 142 

Against women who might raise objection against this transformation of 
"adult" sexuality into a punitive activity, the analyst is armed with invincible 
arguments: "Women who show ... an aversion to men's brutal games may 
be suspect of masculine protest and excessive bi sexuality. Such women may 
very well be clitoroidal." 143 



When a woman protests so energetically against her masochism, her passivity, 
and her femininity, it is because the makeup against which she protests is al- 
ready overdeteimined, owing to constitutionally preponderant bisexuality. But 
for that, she would perfectly and without any great conflict have accepted the 
feminine masochism essential to her sex, 144 

It is carefully stipulated that the penis should not touch the clitoris during 
proper coitus, 148 as such an event would only encourage immaturity and an 
unbecoming disregard for the selfless surrender prescribed as true feminine 
response to a grave and somewhat pompous ritual of pain. In texts of this 

140 Ibid., p. 82. 

141 Ibid., p. 83. 
"2 Ibid., p. 87. 
"3 Ibid. 

144 Ibid., p. 88. 
us lbid., p. 105. 



2o6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




nature the Freudian triad of passivity, narcissism, and masochism are given 
elaborate explication and application. There is a surprising resemblance be- 
tween this view of sexuality and that prescribed for the Victorian wife— each 
knows she must submit and endure, but the woman who has benefited from 
psychoanalysis has been taught that she must do so without withholding 
her will: 

As we know in sexual intercourse, as in life, man is the actor, woman the passive 
one, the receiver, the acted upon. There is a tremendous surging physical 
ecstasy in the yielding itself, in the feeling of being the passive instrument of 
another person, of being stretched out supinely beneath him, taken up will-lessly 
by his passion as leaves are swept before a wind. 148 

Helene Deutsch established her reputation in the psychoanalytic world 
through studies of masochism and has written a two-volume work on female 
sexuality generally accepted as the definitive statement of "true femininity": 

In the light of psychoanalysis, the sexual act assumes an immense, dramatic, and 
profoundly cathartic significance for the woman— but only this under the con- 
dition that it is experienced in a feminine, dynamic way and is not transformed 
into an act of erotic play or sexual "equality." 147 

Carefully avoiding the twin hazards of egalitarianism and delight, sexual 
politics during the era of counterrevolution began in bed; having established 
its doctrine of female subjection there, it confidently applied it to the rest 
of life. 



In 1947 an extremely influential popularization of Freudian theory was 
brought out by a New York psychiatrist named Famham and a sociologist 
named Lundberg, dramatically titled Modern Woman, The Lost Sex. iiS 
As this book is so definitive a statement of counterrevolutionary attitude and 
had enormous influence both on the general public and as a textbook in 
the academic curriculum under the title of "marriage and the family," "life 
adjustment" and other didactic innovations, it is necessary to devote some- 
what more attention to it than it perhaps deserves. It offered a "psychoanalytic" 
version of history, advertised the Middle Ages as a golden period of sanity 
and blamed all the ills of the world on the industrial revolution and Coper- 
nicus. Lumping feminism with nihilism, anarchism, anti-Semitism, Com- 

140 Marie N. Robinson, The Power of Sexual Surrender (New York, Doubleday & 
Company, Inc., 1959), p. 158. 

147 Helene Deutsch, Female Sexuality, The Psychology of Women, 2 vols. (New 
York, 1945), Vol. II, p. 103. 

1-18 Ferdinand Lundberg and Marynia F. Famham, Modern Woman, The Lost Sex 
(New York: Universal Library, 1947). 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



207 



uranism, and racism, by claiming they all preach hatred and violence, it 
made a broadside attack on revolutionary movements, which it bundled to- 
gether with Nazism and the Ku Klux Klan. Its particular grudge was the 
sexual revolution, which had made woman a "lost sex" around whom "much 
of the unhappiness of our day revolves, like a captive planet." 149 

While lamenting that women too have taken up with these "movements 
of the unhappy and the damned," 150 it especially deplores their adherence 
to the Woman's Movement which "stood on a bedrock foundation of ha- 
tred" 161 somehow analogous to Nazism. There is a free indulgence in the 
game of biographical neurosis: Marx is accounted for by an "unconscious 
hatred of political authority"; Mill, dismissed with the derogatory label "pas- 
sive-feminine man," is described as a sissy driven by hatred of his father. 
The real enemy is Mary Wollstonecraft, who began the madness the authors 
designate the sexual revolution. Wollstonecraft is suspect not only as a psy- 
chiatric case history, 152 and one guilty through association with the "fires of 
the French Revolution," 163 but because she and the folly the authors des- 
ignate as feminism had so corrupted youth as to bring about a state of 
"sexual indulgence" indistinguishable from a "monkey house," 154 caused a 
sad decline in the birth rate, and a rise in abortion and divorce. 

Yet it is not enough to find feminism evil— it must be diagnosed as an 
illness, a pathology, a "complex," a mass delusion and an enemy of the hearth : 
"The cohesive integrated home has been destroyed and women are adrift." 155 
The authors gently deplore the status of women in the previous century, 
blaming it on the industrial revolution and even expressing a tempered ap- 
proval of feminist goals which they see as "an attempt to restore earlier rights 
and privileges." 166 Yet whatever slender validity their objectives might have 
had, both feminism and the feminists were "an expresson of emotional sick- 
ness, of neurosis . . . at its core, a deep illness," 157 Taking off from the thesis 
that if the sexes were equal they should be identical (a biological impos- 
sibility) the authors label equality a "fetish," and go on to inform us that the 
feminists wanted to be males, and suffered from penis envy. Lundberg and 
Famham unhesitatingly equate status and social position with male genitals 
in curious equations such as "male power— maleness," 158 and "this is what 
equality means: identity." 150 Wollstonecraft and the rest were "making a 

i« Ibid., p. 24. 
15 » Ibid., p. 33. 
"I Ibid. 

152 Jfojd., p, 149, 

153 Ifc«3., p. 33. 
l= 4 Ibid., p. 35. 
155 Ibid., p. 142. 
™«lbid., p. 143. 

" 7 Ibid. 

™&lbid., p. 150. 
Wlbid., p. 147. 




2o8 SEXUAL POLITICS 

plea for the admission of women to the company of men on the factually 
erroneous premise that they were identical to men." 160 "It should be apparent 
that, far from being a movement for the greater self-realization of women , , 
feminism was the very negation of femaleness ... It bade women commit 
suicide as women, and attempt to live as men." 361 In demanding equal rights 
the feminists were asking to be men, a psychic derangement as lamentable 
as that of a man trying to achieve femininity. When one perceives that any 
ambition beyond motherhood is an ambition after the "impossible"— an am- 
bition to be a man— then "everything falls into place." 182 It does indeed. 

The Lost Sex is explicit about what it takes to be the real feminist threat, 
an end to home, family and motherhood. Following the bromide that "mar- 
riage is an institution evolved ... to protect women" 103 comes the admission 
that feminism had not attacked marriage and the family per se, and then the 
charge that in "simply denying they were women . . . asserting they needed 
no male protection," "clamoring" for economic independence, the revolu- 
tionaries were removing the beneficial "economic drives pushing 
women into marriage." 10 ' 1 It is this which is most bitterly resented, this could 
make it possible to "avoid being women," 165 which the authors unappetizingly 
define as the process of forming a "sentimental bond" with an "economic 
overlord." 166 

Through divorce, through abortion, through contraception, the sexual revo- 
lution had undermined marriage. Feminists had even attacked the double 
standard, with one clear motive— "their own deep desire to engage in lecher- 
ous and sensual activities." 107 This tragic error was, like all the rest, motivated 
by a futile desire to "emulate the male." 1118 In advocating a single non- 
ascetic standard, feminists were actually scheming for a "condition of sexual 
promiscuity." Our authors endorse premarital chastity, but only for females 
as they find the double standard "not only inevitable but desirable" and a 
single standard "inwardly psychopathological" and "outwardly farcical." 109 

Having attacked sexual reform and put their opposition on the defensive 
with the charge of penis envy and an ingenious interpretation of history, 
Lundberg and Farnham bring on their more insidious "soft line." This is a 
glorification of "femininity," the family, female submission, and above all, 
motherhood. To do so requires nothing more elaborate than the forensic 
equipment which served Ruskin, but at times there is a curious tone of "fe- 



10 ° IW., 


P- 


150. 


lei Ibid., 


r- 


166. 


i«Ifcid., 


p- 


162. 


i« ; ' Ibid., 


p- 


191. 


'<» Ibid., 


p- 


192. 


ifi-" Ibid. 






iw> Ibid., 


p- 


i6 3 . 


i»' Ibid. 


p- 


196. 


m* Ibid. 






i»« Ibid., 


pp 


174-75 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 20CJ 

male chauvinism" about many of their pronouncements. At its positive mo- 
ments, however The Lost Sex only rewrites a "Queen's Gardens" doctrine 
f separate spheres. One grows appalled at how monotonous polemic in this 
area can be. 

Employing a tactic that was to become a reactionary classic, the authors 
insist that the sexual revolution must have been error for so many women 
are still imperfectly happy; witness how they suffer from "conflicts," from 
"problems." Under the guise of solicitude, such comforters end by punishing 
the sufferer of these vague and convenient symptoms still further. If woman 
is "maladjusted" the fault lies in herself rather than in the social situation 
to which she is exhorted to adjust by assuming her unchangeable constitu- 
tional passivity. 170 Accusation poses as diagnosis, prescription as descrip- 
tion. Much of the book might also pass for a parody of D. H. Lawrence 
(were it not so abominably written) for the whole is so steeped in Lawrentian 
attitudes that it has the air of pastiche. It continuously advises us to turn our 
backs on the machine and the "brave new facade of modernity" 171 and re- 
turn to the old instinctual ways, never actually defined, yet always asserted 
to be better. 

About midway through this enormous and empty book, one realizes that 
the authors have begun to exude confidence that the danger is passing, the 
revolution has been thwarted, and the "bringing in line" may proceed in less 
venomous tones. There are still recurrent attacks and condemnations of "cas- 
trators" who fail to comply or object to the notion of obedience to male au- 
thority, 172 but, on the whole, the authors come to prefer the method of 
positive injunction; feminine subordination is phrased as "supporting" "man- 
liness" in its "wishes for domination." 173 At times one even detects a note 
of petition. All male activity, maleness, perhaps patriarchy itself, depend 
upon penile erection: "Here it is that mastery and domination, the central 
capacity of the man's sexual nature must meet acceptance or fail," 174 To 
achieve erection, the male must be master. More recently, advocates of this 
notion of physiology have termed this the "cichlid effect," a theory of human 
sexuality modeled on the reactions of a prehistoric fish whom Konrad Lorenz 
examined to conclude that male cichlids failed to find the courage to mate 
unless the female of their species responded with "awe." How one meas- 
ures "awe" in a fish is a question perhaps better left unanswered, but the 
implications of this notion that the female's awe of the male is physically nec- 

170 Marie Robinson's The Power of Sexual Surrender took over Lundberg and Fam- 
ham's thesis intact and in ascribing frigidity to feminism advertises a treatment of learning 
to accept and enjoy male dominance. 

171 Lundberg and Famham, op. cit., p. 201. 
"2 Ibid, p. 236, 

173 Ibid., p. 241. 
«* Ibid. 



2 io SEXUAL POLITICS 

essary to sexual intercourse are surely transparent enough if applied to men 
and women. 170 

Perhaps what is most distressing about The Lost Sex is its pervasive odor 
of commercialization. Psychoanalysis is presented here as a business enter- 
prise built on the grave of feminism and professing to be the only cure for 
the recalcitrant and "unhappy" woman the authors see everywhere about 
them, undergoing conflict between a new life style and traditional or con- 
stitutional needs. 

"Inner Space" 

Recently, two new statements on sexual differences have appeared. Both 
argue from "nature" by presupposing congenital temperaments for the two 
sexes. Lionel Tiger has defined patriarchy and male dominance as the func- 
tion of a "bonding" instinct inherent in the male. This is patently a case 
of endorsement through rationalization, the "instinct" a method of convert- 
ing history to biology. Erik Erikson's formulation that a relation to inner 
and outer space differentiates the sexes is more benign and probably more in- 
fluential. Retaining a Freudian or psychoanalytic theory of female personality 
and the notion that this is innate, Erikson adds something new in suggesting 
"femininity" is socially and politically useful. 

Erikson begins his famous essay "Womanhood and the Inner Space" 170 
by deprecating that part of male achievement which has brought the race 
to the brink of destruction, appealing to women to save it: 

Maybe if women could only gain the determination to represent publicly what 
they have always stood for privately in evolution and in history (realism of 
upbringing, resourcefulness in peace-keeping and devotion to healing), they 
might well add an ethically restraining, because truly supranational, power 
to politics in the widest sense. 177 

One cannot but note in passing that the force of this recommendation is to 
urge that women participate in political power not because such is their hu- 
man right, but because an extension of their proper feminine sphere into 
the public domain would be a social good. This is to argue from expediency 
rather than justice. However, let us meet Erikson on his own chosen ground. 
One finds it hard not to agree that the conduct of human affairs under male 

175 See Jesse Bernard's The Sex Game (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, 1968). 
Lorenz 's comment on the cichlid is as follows "A male can only pair with an awe-inspiring 
and therefore dominant male." Konrad Lorenz, On Aggression, New York: Harcourt, 
1966), p. 99. Needless to say, Lorenz himself did not apply this instance of subhuman 
behavior (offset by different or even opposite behavior in other species) to human beings. 

178 Erik Erikson "Womanhood and the Inner Space" (1964), Identity, Youth and 
Crisis (New York, W. W. Norton, 1968). First primed in Daedalus, The Journal of 
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Spring 1964. 

177 Ibid., p. 262. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 211 

dominance has produced our present predicament (the essay was written un- 
der the shadow of the Bomb) and that the temperamental traits Erikson as- 
signs to women would be eminently useful in the conduct of society. What 
Erikson does not recognize is that the traits of each group are culturally con- 
ditioned and depend upon their political relation ship, which has been rela- 
tively constant throughout history regardless of contemporary crises. Instead, 
the entire emphasis of his essay, and the whole force of the experiment on 
which his theory is based, is to convince us that complementary masculine 
and feminine traits are inherently male and female. Erikson has perceived that 
much of what we know as masculine in our culture is and must be recog- 
nized as progressively antisocial and dangerous even to the preservation of 
the species, while much of what we know as feminine is directly related to 
its well-being. The logical recommendation to be made from this does seem 
to be a synthesis of the two sexual temperaments. Even acknowledging that, 
under the present circumstances of two sharply divided sexual cultures, we 
could achieve a human balance only through co-operation of the two groups 
with their fragmented collective personalities, one must really go further and 
urge a dissemination to members of each sex of those socially desirable traits 
previously confined to one or the other while eliminating the bellicosity or 
excessive passivity useless in either. But to do this is considerably beyond 
Erikson's scope, since he believes in the existence of innate sexual tempera- 
ment and imagines the experiment he relates is proof of it. 

Erikson is dedicated to the hope of maintaining sexual polarity, its "vital 
tension," which might be lost in "too much sameness, equality, and equiva- 
lence/' 178 yet at the same time he wishes to humanize society: 

A new balance of Male and Female, of Paternal and Maternal is obviously 
presaged not only in contemporary changes in the relation of the sexes to each 
other, but also in the wider awareness which spreads wherever science, tech- 
nology and genuine self-scrutiny advance. 170 

Although one is not usually aware that masculine civilization advances 
through paternal impulse, there is no question in Erikson's mind that the 
contribution he would encourage in women should be offered on the au- 
thority of motherhood: "The question arises whether such a potential for 
annihilation as now exists in the world should continue to exist without the 
representation of the mothers of the species in the councils of image-making 
and decision." 180 

Erikson professes he is deeply impressed by "that everyday miracle, preg- 
nancy and childbirth" (maternity is something of a preoccupation with him) 
and the experiment he is about to relate is put forward as proof that the 

"8 Ibid., p. 264. 

"» Ibid. 
™°lbid., p. 265. 




212, 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



materna] instinct exists through some inherent "somatic" awareness in the 
female and constitutes her "identity." Here Erikson, who imposes no such 
limiting perspective in his studies of identity in males, appears to limit in- 
dividual identity in women to a nearly exclusively sexual basis, believing 
"much of a young woman's identity is already defined in her kind of at- 
tractiveness" and its function is largely confined to selecting a mate in "her 
search for the man Cor men) by whom she wishes to be sought." 181 The 
period of formal education when she is permitted to extend her interest to 
activities "removed from the future function of childbearing" is, in Erikson's 
view, simply a "moratorium." 182 But "a true moratorium must have a term 
and a conclusion: womanhood arrives when attractiveness and experience 
have succeeded in selecting what is to be admitted to the welcome of the 
inner space 'for keeps.' " 183 The stages of female growth are all dedicated to 
the moment when she will "commit herself to the love of a stranger and to 
the care to be given to his and her offspring:" 184 

Here, whatever sexual differences and dispositions have developed in earlier life 
become polarized with finality because they must become part of the whole 
process of production and procreation which marks adulthood. But how does 
the identity formation of women differ by dint of the fact that their somatic 
design harbors an "inner space" destined to bear the offspring of chosen men, 
and with it, a biological, psychological, and ethical commitment to take care of 
human infancy? 185 

Much of the uneasy, even contradictory, tone of the essay is due to the 
fact that Erikson vacillates between two versions of woman, Freud's chauvin- 
ism and a chivalry of his own. He wishes to insist both that female anatomy 
is destiny (and personality as well) yet at the same time pleads that the 
preordained historical subordination of women be abridged by a gallant con- 
cession to maternal interests. He compliments "the richly convex parts of the 
female anatomy which suggest fullness, warmth, and generosity" 180 — yet 
maintains the hallowed Freudian definition of the female as a creature with a 
"woundlike aperture," "missing" a penis. 187 He is by no means willing to 
relinquish the Freudian concept of female masochism, and even expands it 

!81 lhid., p. 2.83. 
i»2 Ibid. 

**8 Ibid. 

184 lhid., p. 265. 

185 Ibid., pp. 265-66. 

186 Jbid., p. 267. 

187 Ibid. In Childhood and Society (1950), Erikson compared female penis envy with 
Negro fantasies of whiteness and gave the impression he perfectly understood it to have 
cultural origins. Yet in that context, as well as in this, he is still free with such phrases 
as "loss from the genital region," "genital scar," and "absent penis." See pp. 244, 231, 
and 228. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



213 



to include the menses, "inner periodicities in addition to the pain of child- 
birth, which is explained in the Bible as the eternal penalty for Eve's de- 
linquent behavior," all of which prompts Erikson to employ the poetic epithet 
"dolorosa." 188 Beneath the sympathetic surface of the essay there is a rather 
disturbing complacency. Erikson is content, until we invent a "new kind of 
biocultural history," to interpret the long oppression of woman as due to her 
innate masochism, which explains how she has come to 

lend herself to a variety of roles conducive to an exploitation of masochistic po- 
tentials; she has let herself be confined and immobilized, enslaved and infanti- 
lized, prostituted and exploited, deriving from it at best what in psychology we 
call "secondary gains" of devious dominance. 189 

Erikson would, to some degree, balance the Freudian theory of penis envy 
with one of his own that girls derive satisfaction and personality structure 
from an intuitive knowledge of "the existence of a productive inner bodily 
space safely set in the center of female form and carriage," claiming this 
"makes any sense of inadequacy impossible." 190 Freud's penis-envy formula- 
tion has the effect of an edict that women shall stay out of male "territory" 
because they are anatomically incapable of participating in it; Erikson's 
uterine glorification is a gender form of persuasion purportedly based on the 
findings of a great laboratory experiment. 

Over a span of two years, I saw r 50 boys and 1 50 girls three times and presented 
them, one at a time, with the task of constructing a "scene" with toys on a table. 
The toys were rather ordinary— a family, some uniformed figures (policemen, 
aviator, Indian, monk, etc.), wild and domestic animals, furniture, automo- 
biles—but I also provided a large number of blocks. The children were asked to 
imagine that the table was a moving-picture studio; the toys, actors and props; 
and they themselves, moving-picture directors. They were to arrange on the 
table "an exciting scene from an imaginary moving picture," and then tell the 
plot. This was recorded, the scene photographed, and the child complimented. 
It may be necessary to add that no "interpretation" was given . . . Sex differ- 
ences thus were not the initial focus of my interest. I concentrated my attention 
on how the construction in progress moved forward to the edge of the table or 
back to the wall behind it; how they rose to shaky heights or remained close to 
the table surface . . . That all of this "says" something about the constructor is 
the open secret of all "projective techniques." This too cannot be discussed here. 
But I soon realized that in evaluating a child's play construction, I had to take 
into consideration the fact that girls and boys used space differendy, and that 
certain configurations occurred strikingly often in the construction of one sex 
and rarely in those of the other. The differences themselves were so simple 
that at first they seemed a matter of course. History in the meantime has offered 



188 "Womanhood and The Inner Space," p. 

"8 Ibid. 

"o Ibid., p. 267. 



284- 



2i4 SEXLML POLITICS 

a slogan for it: the girls emphasized inner and the boys outer space . . Th' 
then, is typical: the girl's scene is a house interior represented either as a con- 
figuration of furniture without any surrounding walls or by a simple endosw' 
built with blocks. In the girl's scene, people and animals are mostly witJifo 
such an interior or enclose, and they are primarily people or animals in a static 
(sitting or standing) position. Girls' enclosures consist of low walls, i.e. only on 
block high, except for an occasional elaborate doorway. These interiors of house 
with or without walls were, for the most part, expressly peaceful. Often, a little 
girl was playing the piano. In a number of cases the interior was intruded by 
animals or dangerous men . . . Boys' scenes are either houses with elaborate 
walls or facades with protrusions such as cones or cylinders representing 
ornaments or cannons. There are high towers, and there are entirely exterior 
scenes. In boys' constructions more people and animals are outside enclosures or 
buildings, and there are more automotive objects and animals moving along 
streets and animals moving along streets and intersections. There are elaborate 
automotive accidents. . . . While high structures are prevalent in the configura- 
tions of the boys, there is also much play with the danger of collapse or down- 
fall; reins were exclusively boys' constructions. 

The male and female spaces, then, were dominated, respectively, by height 
and downfall and by strong motion and its channeling or arrest; and by static 
interiors which were open or simply enclosed, and peaceful or intruded upon 
It may come as a surprise to some and seem a matter of course to others that 
here sexua] differences in the organization of a play scene paralleled the mor- 
phology of genital differentiation itself; in the male, an external organ, erect- 
able and intrusive in character, serving the channelization of mobile sperm 
cells; in the female, internal organs, with vestibular access, leading to statically 
expectant ova. The question is: what is really surprising about this, what only 
too obvious, and in either case, what does it tell us about the two sexes?"* 

What indeed? Since Erikson admits, without further reference to age and 
education, that these were young people in their "teens," it is likely to prove 
they have absorbed the socialization imposed upon them by their cul- 
ture-policemen, Indians, story-book animals and all. He admits that youth 
of this age found his experiment banal and tiresome, and performed to be 
obliging. Erikson invites us to cooperate in his vision of piano playing as 
static" and "peaceful" rather than boring™* and a moving automobile as 
equivalent to "mobile sperm cells." We are further asked to accept these dis- 
tinctions as based on "somatic design," an elaborate term for body parts, and 
to find in the paraphernalia of Erikson's playroom, nature's explanation for 
the sexual polarity our culture has created between the roles, temperament, 
and status of the sexes. 

191 Ibid., pp. 268-72. 

"sin view of the assignment-"™ exciting scene from an imaginary moving-picture" 
-hnksons satisfaction over the static quality of the girls' scene is rather surprising. It 
must haye been difficult for American girls to "imagine" themselves "motion-picture 
directors m any case since their society totally deprives them of such role models. 




THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



215 



What the experiment does seem to illustrate, and with remarkable clarity, 
is that each group responded with extreme sensitivity to its conditioning; one 
jo passive domesticity, the other to egoistic achievement, pardy constructive 
(towers, machines, ornament) and partly destructive (cannons, accidents, 
ruins). Yet for all the efficiency of the socialization (perhaps somewhat facili- 
tated by Erikson's standardized Hollywood movie equipment) not every 
youth responded as planned. Some unaccounted for number failed to con- 
form: a girl who did outside scenes is dismissed as a "tomboy," a boy who was 
jnsufficiendy aggressive would also register as a deviate (effeminate), popu- 
larly regarded as a graver danger. One must also recall the normative attitude 
in which sexual identity is viewed. In 1964, when this study was first pub- 
licized sexual reaction had created a climate where failure to conform to 
sexual category was seen as unhealthy or disturbing. 

In analyzing the behavior of each sex, Erikson has solicitously italicized 
all the clue words in his somewhat overdeliberate verbal interpretation of 
the events he beheld into a sort of anatomical predestination. The descrip- 
tion, which for the sake of fairness, has been reprinted almost in its entirety, 
has its amusing moments. The vulva, less the author's interest than the womb, 
is to be derived from the phrase "elaborate doorways"; one wonders if the 
clitoris may be construed from some element of entrance decor. The time- 
honored device of equating "femininity" with the passive ("static") so that 
one may prescribe and enforce it is balanced by the equation of the penis 
with grandiose towers, speeding and colliding autos, cannons and ruins. 
"Do we have wars because of detumescencei 1 " one is expected to ask Feminine 
"passivity" is always reasoned from anatomy, but masculine activity is gen- 
erally reasoned from history and technology; a logical inconsistency which 
leaves the parallel with an asymmetry that is aesthetically unsatisfying. 183 

As an experiment, there is so much in Erikson's report and in the impli- 
cations he derives from it, which will not bear scrutiny, that its claim to 
he accepted as scientific evidence is negligible indeed. It does however, tell 
us a good deal about Erikson, a man genuinely interested in peace and the 
"feminine" virtues, although apparendy quite unable to conceive that since 
they are humanly valuable they should, logically, be equally valuable for 
both sexes. Within the experiment no variable was employed, no attempt to 
reverse proceedings, both of which are essential when one is trying to prove 
inherency, since what is not arbitrary, imposed, irrelevant, acquired, or 
learned, will continue to he manifest despite other instructions or modifica- 
tions in the situation. Erikson's whole theory is built on psychoanalysis' per- 
sistent error of mistaking learned behavior for biology. The elaborate phrase- 
ology of "somatic design" is calculated to appeal to the common reader and 
to convince social scientists, often remarkably gullible in respect to physi- 

193 The vel y notion of active spermatozoa on which the Freudian theory of male 
activity ultimately relies depends upon the microscope's evidence. Do male children 
"intuit" itr 




2l6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



ological evidence. When describing behavior by hypotheses which are So 
often intuitive, even literary, they are all too prone to make vague appeals to 
the natural sciences for the support of ascertainable evidence, enlisted to 
confirm the mythic with incontrovertible data. 

Erikson believes he has answered objections by the disclosure that photos 
of his subjects' constructions were sex-identifiable to his colleagues. This is 
not very conclusive, since his teen-agers themselves proved so adept at taking 
such conspicuous cultural clues. The behavior of the subjects themselves is 
insisted on: "If the boys thought primarily of their present or anticipated 
roles, why, for example, is the policeman their favorite toy?" 19 * Why in- 
deed? One is often mystified by the incongruity of giving middle-class chil- 
dren police and fireman toys with which to identify, functionaries whom it 
would mortify their parents to see them grow up to be. Yet possibly the motive 
is revealed in Erikson's question-a policeman is an authority figure operat- 
ing by physical force, and it is just this idea of himself that official educators 
such as public schools and the producers of textbooks wish to inculcate in 
the little male. Why boys choose policemen to align themselves with and 
girls do not is hardly a question; apart from the fact that they are taught to 
make sex-category identifications and policemen are not women, everv child 
or rather most of those in Erikson's test, is fully aware that boys are supposed 
to play with policemen and girls are not. What might be more productive to 
study is the child who has broken the magic circle of programmed learning 
so that one could isolate elements which helped in transcending the cul- 
tural mold. How, for example, does a tomboy arrive at the positive "aggres- 
sion" of an outdoor scene, or a boy arrive at a peaceful scene; the one escaping 
the doll house which has been successfully inflicted on her peers, the other 
the malevolence inflicted on his. 

Eleanor Maccoby's informative article on female intelligence 185 offers some 
clues to this sort of question by pointing out that the independence and ego- 
strength necessary for first-rate achievement in certain analytical fields is 
completely absent from the cultural experience of nearly every girl child. 
Other experiments 198 have proven that the field orientation and dependency, 
the reliance upon approval and destructive attention which is the general 
course of female upbringing, produces in boys, a condition of passivity and 
infantilism considered extremely detrimental to achievement and even to 
maturity. The double standard of formal, and even informal, education de- 
crees that what is harmful to one group is beneficial to another. And so it 

194 Erikson, "Womanhood and the Inner Space" op. cit., p. 172, 

195 Eleanor Maccoby, "Woman's Intellect," The Potential of Woman (New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 1963), edited by Farber and Wilson. 

188 Maccoby mentions the following studies: D. M. Levy, Maternal Overprotection 
(New York, Columbia University Press, 1943); H. A. Witkin, Helen B. Lewis, M. Herz- 
man, Karen Machover, Pearl Meissener and S. Wepner, Personality Through Perception 
(New York, Harper and Row, 1954); H. A. Witkin, R. B. Dyk, H. E. Faterson, 
D. R. Goodnough, S. A. Karp, Psychological Differentiation (New York, Wiley, 1962). 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



217 



j s if one approves an arrested development for half the race at the level of 
"playing house." While it is indisputable that the games of both sexes were, 
aS the result of Erikson's choice of materials, notably banal, those for the 
girls were, for all the sedate feminine virtue the investigator found in them, 
but the prediction of stereotypical domestic lives; those of the boys had the 
seeds of something that might become real achievement, architectural, tech- 
nological and exploratory, as well as moronic violence and war. 

The pacific, rather than merely passive character which Erikson ascribes 
to the girl's play is of course most depressing in view of the fact it lacks all 
possibility of social implementation until the female "sphere" becomes not the 
doll's house inner space Erikson endorses, but the world. What is perhaps 
most discouraging of all is not even the masculine fixation on violence but 
the futility of the girls' sedentary dream, even its barrenness, for they sit 
awaiting the "intrusion of men and animals" (a remarkable combination) 
and doing nothing at all— not even the "nurturance" expected of them. 

Could the role of playing the piano in the bosom of their families really be 
considered representative of what these girls (some of them passionate horse- 
back riders and all future automobile drivers) wanted to do most or, indeed 
thought they should pretend they wanted to do? 187 

Unless we assume, as Erikson does, that the pianos in some obscure manner 
do pertain to inherent female nature as "natural reasons which must claim 
our interest," the very "spatial order" of their sex, one can only conclude 
that the female is more completely and more negatively conditioned than 
the male. And it seems she has to be in order to fulfill the far more limited 
existence or, in jargon, "role" which Erikson and his confreres would con- 
tinue to prescribe for her. Erikson himself takes satisfaction from the more 
"limited circle of activities" which girls are permitted in society, and the 
'less resistance to control" they exhibit than do males. The latter phrase may 
be rendered in one word— docility. 198 

Yet Erikson's entire project in the article was to make this more palatable, 
to shift 

theoretical emphasis From the loss of an external organ to a sense of vital 
inner potential; from a hateful contempt for the mother to a solidarity with 
her and other women; from a "passive" renunciation of male activity to the 
purposeful competent pursuit of activities consonant with the possession of 
ovaries, a uterus, and a vagina; and from a masochistic pleasure in pain to an 
ability to stand (and to understand) pain as a meaningful aspect of human ex- 
perience in general and of the feminine role in particular. And so it is in the 

197 Erikson, op. cit., p. 272. 

198 M., p. 287. 




2l8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



"fully feminine" woman, as such outstanding writers as Helene Deutsch nave 
recognized. 189 

There is a certain awkwardness in the fact that no matter how he tries 
to brighten the picture, Erikson is incapable of stopping at the right moment, 
but must always go on to exhibit his own distaste or misgiving for the situation 
he is trying to reinterpret in such positive terms. Even the possession of a 
womb becomes a detriment, leaving the female "unfulfilled" every moment 
she is not pregnant: 

No doubt also, the very existence of the inner productive space exposes women 
early to a specific sense of loneliness, to a fear of being left empty or deprived 
of treasures, of remaining unfulfilled and of drying up . . . For, as pointed 
out, clinical observation suggests that in female experience an "inner space" is 
at the center of despair even as it is the very center of potential fulfillment. 
Emptiness is the female form of perdition— known at times to men of the inner 
life . . . but standard experience for all women. To be left, for her, means to 
be left empty . . . Such hurt can be re-experienced in each menstruation; it is a 
crying to heaven in the mourning over a child; and it becomes a permanent 
scar in the menopause. 200 

To attempt to equate pregnancy with artistic creation (referred to as a male 
monopoly of the "inner life") attracts attention at once, but this is soon lost 
in the rich prose picture of menstruation as bereavement. One cannot help 
but find the latter an interesting poetic conceit, but essentially absurd as a 
description of woman's emotions. It might be amusing to pursue Erikson's 
fancy: by rough computation, a woman menstruates some 450 times in her 
life. One begins to grasp the multiple sorrow of this many bereavements, that 
many children she didn't bear, as a demographer's nightmare. 201 



Sensitive to the contemporary interest in animal societies, Erikson intro- 
duces the baboon. Like our author himself, the baboons Washbum and de 
Vere photographed in their famous study appeared to be chivalrous, "the 
greatest warriors display a chivalry" which protects the weak female with 
her "lesser fighting equipment." 202 Here Erikson invokes Freud's phrase 

™Ibid., p. 275. 

wo Ibid., pp. 277-78. 

201 An archetypal bearer relying upon Erikson's picture of opportunities would aim at 
some 40-50 children were she exceptionally, flawlessly fertile, and strong enough to sur- 
vive the ordeal. Fortunately, there is no evidence that the good man wishes to make this 
fertility emphasis bilateral, in which case it would be necessary to preserve all semen 
(whether the product of masturbation, wet dreams or homosexual activities). At mo- 
ments, however, this would appear to be the attitude of the Catholic church. 

202Ifcid., p. ago. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



219 



about the "rock bottom of sexual differentiation" 203 inferring that evi- 
dence of infrahuman species confirms traditional notions of sexually differ- 
entiated roles. The author proceeds to generalize from primate evidence and 
the length of mammalian gestation to justify the seclusion of women ("limited 
circle of activities") and their subordinate position ("less resistance to con- 
trol").* 04 But as a pacifist, Erikson has just committed a fatal error: baboon 
society is built on war, he believes, and human society is said to hold certain 
traits constant in its evolutionary descent from primate life. It is just as likely 
then that war is as inherent and inevitable as the psycho-sexual behavior he 
insists upon and therefore, that female co-operation in the hope of peace can 
affect it no more than can the efforts of female baboons. This scheme of 
secluded motherhood guarded by aggressive and predatory male "chivalry" 
is very close to Ruskin's. In urging woman's participation in the larger social 
and political life, yet insisting she stay within her traditional domestic sphere 
and passive temperament (or insisting that such is innate) Erikson has de- 
feated his own purpose. The female continues to be socially ineffective be- 
cause confined by a menial, domestic or biorcproductive role, while the male 
who does control every avenue of public efficacy, continues (and is authorized 
to continue) to exercise the aggression defined as his nature. If human sexual 
temperament is inherent, there is really very little hope for us. 

Erikson disclaims any intention to "doom" woman to perpetual motherhood 
or "deny her the equivalence of individuality and the equality of citizenship;" 
he is simply eager that she not "compete" or participate in the "active male 
proclivities" of civilization. Since "woman is never not-a-woman," as he states 
with assumed profundity, it is clear that once she has proven herself equal 
to "men's performance and competence in most spheres of achievement"— and 
it is said that she has— Erikson is content to assume that the potential equal- 
ity of the sexes is proven, without requiring that their actual inequality be 
modified. He implies woman would do well to rely upon her "right to 
be uniquely creative" through maternity and think little further. Like Ruskin, 
Erikson appears to believe women are "better" and therefore should offer a 
vicarious and remote moral assistance to the male. Yet in both men there is a 
fairly clear understanding that civilization is a male department. And since 
both masculine vanity and masculine uneasiness lest "femininity" be lost 
(and with it, the only kindness either men profess to see in human beings) 
prevents the male from acquiring the humanity attributed to woman, or 
woman from transcending her politically and socially powerless role, Erikson 
is as unlikely to realize his hopes as Ruskin's queens were powerless to abridge 
the evils of industrialism. Others, less sincere than Erikson, may find in his 
theory a splendid rationale to insure that the "outer space" of the techno- 
logical future and every means of social and political control remain ex- 

wibid., p. 181. 
2°* Ibid. 




220 SEXUAL POLITICS 

clusively male prerogative. And to such an end fables about "inner space" are 
very expedient myth. 



The Influence of Functionalism 

During the period of the reaction, the social sciences tended to turn from 
political or historical considerations to focus their attention upon social struc- 
tures, providing careful descriptions of how theoretic models operated. Hence 
the leading school of thought named itself "functionalism." At first glance, 
its method is one of purely objective description; on the surface it would 
present itself as value-free. Utility alone detains its clear and disinterested 
glance; if a pattern works, it may be said to function. Yet all systems which 
perpetuate themselves may be called functional in this minimal sense: peon- 
age, racism, feudalism. Despite their stability, many oppressive forms do not 
function efficiendy. The debilitated patriarchy which functionalists describe 
when they turn their attention to sociosexual matters operates with enormous 
waste and friction. But when functionalists recognize the latter as "conflict," 
they tend to put the burden of responsibility for it upon the individual who 
experiences it. 

Were such a thing as a value-free social science even possible, it would very 
likely be monstrous; one which disguises its values is insidious. Since func- 
tionalism does not go beyond the status quo for its enunciated frame of refer- 
ence, it produces a description of the present arrived at by means of die 
measurements it has devised. These might in themselves be somewhat sus- 
pect, for, like all methodologies, they are end-oriented. But without quarrel- 
ing over methods, the description itself is sufficient evidence of bias. For tak- 
ing the situation at hand, measuring, stating, and generalizing from it, func- 
tionalism, notwithstanding its fetish for the mathematical sciences, operates 
at odds with the scientific method in neglecting causality: one scarcely needs 
pages of tables to know that the poor are poor. And so in its measurement of 
sex difference, every form of passivity and aggression in sex-linked behavior 
is tested continuously, yet little thought is given as to the causality of such 
phenomena, either as learned behavior, or as behavior specifically appropriate 
to patriarchal society. When the differentiation of roles is regarded as func- 
tional, no serious explanation of the political character of such function is 
given: any set of complementary roles may be called functional to the extent 
they promote stable operation within a system. 

Moreover, functionalist description inevitably becomes prescriptive. The 
discovery that a mode is functional tends to grant it prescriptive authority. 
In an atmosphere where "normality" and even worth are made to depend 
upon conformity (in this case to sexual category based on statistical average) 
such conformity is strongly urged. While early studies were content to meas- 
ure and generalize, later rationalizations of a sexual differentiation in temper- 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



221 



arnent (and by extension, role) grew altogether bolder. Having found 
traditional behavior functional, functionalists could now prescribe it: having 
found the status quo operable, they could proceed to find it "natural" hence 
biologically "necessary." This was effected either by taking refuge in psycho- 
analysis' erroneous biological explanations, or through hazy generalizations 
of their own. The main service of functionalism appears to reside in its 
justification of the system it perceives and covertly identifies with, followed 
by prescriptive recommendations on how to "adjust" groups or individuals 
to this system. When it filters down to practical application in schools, indus- 
try, and popular media, it may simply become a form of cultural policing. 

Functionalism finds it agreeable to operate in an endless present. Against 
the dynamism of growth and change it proposes an ideal of stability. In 
ignoring values, it ignores history, either through an appeal to historical 
naivete 1 or by an elimination of historical evidence altogether. History is in- 
formation, and as such it might well provide sociology with a perspective 
on institutions such as patriarchy. Such historical perspective might permit 
it to interpret sex role in terms of a system which is no longer even utilitarian, 
was always unjust, and is becoming increasingly wasteful. Functionalism 
either fails to mention patriarchy (it is hard to find the word in functionalist 
texts save in the sense of an adjective with some vague Biblical coloring), 
or gives no recognition to patriarchy as a form of social government, or simply 
assumes that patriarchy is the first form of human grouping, the origin of all 
society, and therefore too fundamental to merit discussion. The great social 
transformation which the sexual revolution had accomplished in the partial 
emancipation of women is deliberately overlooked or semantically obliterated 
in such phrases as "change in role"— accompanied by the assumption that 
change has brought much social maladjustment. Where stability is the meas- 
ure of success, change is not viewed favorably, 

One of the most unfortunate aspects of civilization is the extent to which 
learning and scientific interest are so deeply affected by the culture in which 
such study is done. A Nazi state invents its own Nazi social investigation; a 
racist state can formulate a racist science to sanction its most passionate 
hatreds. 203 While the social sciences in America are just now being purged 
of a racist bias indulged with considerable freedom over many decades, a 
strong "sexist" bias, the product of several decades of reaction, still pervades 
such areas of study. 

As the major trend of the sexual revolution had been to de-emphasize 
traditional distinctions between the sexes both as to role and to temperament, 
while exposing the discrepancy in status, the most formidable task of re- 
actionary opinion was to blur or disguise distinctions in status while re- 
emphasizing sexual differences in personality by implying that they are innate 
rather than cultural. A differentiation of roles followed upon that of tempera- 

205 See Peter Rose, The Subject Was Race, Traditional Ideologies and the Teaching 
of Race Relations, Oxford, 1968. 



222 SEXUAL POLITICS 

ment, and it too was regarded as eminently useful, even necessary. As this 
return to a conservative prerevolutionary system required validation, the 
whole weight of public authority which the social sciences had gradually 
amassed was now exerted in favor of patriarchal ideology, attitudes, and in- 
stitutions. The preservation of conservative notions of marriage and the fam- 
ily, of sex role, of temperamental trait and identity through conformity to 
sexual norms, took on something of the nature of defense of holy ground. 
Socialist experiment or change generally came to be viewed with pity or 
derision. 

Since the model on which such attitudes are formed comes from the past, 
functionalism has a nostalgic flavor under its impersonal exterior. Perhaps 
this is nowhere more quaintly evident than in Talcott Parsons' functionalist 
evocation of "youth culture" as student life in some golden past when all 
was varsity prom and varsity football. 208 One can often discern some faintly 
glamorized version of the social scientist's own childhood in the comfortable 
middle class. The orientation is small town and Middle West, a world of 
some twenty years back, before the dangers and innovations of the present 
ever occurred to the investigator. One sees it echoed in the media's bland 
portraits of comfort, in the children's texts illustrated with blond and bour- 
geois parents, prosperously equipped with an automobile and a house of their 
own, neatly divided into breadwinner in business suit and housewife beaming 
behind her apron. 

Each of the social disciplines contributed to re-establishing and then main- 
taining a reactionary status quo in sexual politics, each through its own 
method of reasoning: anthropologists might study cross-cultural divisions of 
labor and ascribe them to a fundamental biological source, while sociologists, 
in announcing they merely recorded social phenomena, gradually came to 
ratify them by noting that nonconformist behavior is in fact deviant and 
produces "problems." The psychologist, in deploring individual maladjust- 
ment to social and sexual role, finally came to justify both as inherent psycho- 
logical nature, fundamental to the species and biological in essence. Later 
this point of view acquired sufficient confidence to go on the offensive. The 
habit of discovering and deploring instances of feminine dominance grew 
obsessive. It became eminently fashionable to regard sexual identity, espe- 
cially for the male, as so crucial to ego development that any frustration of 
the demands of masculine prerogative would result in considerable psychic 
damage, described either as neurosis or homosexuality. In its extreme forms, 
this attitude insists it is therapeutic necessity, somehow an issue of social 
health, that male supremacy continue unchallenged. 

I have chosen two examples of the type of thinking representative of 
these attitudes. One is a study entitled "A Cross-cultural Survey of Some 

209 Talcott Parsons, "Age and Sex in the Social Structure of the United States," 1942, 
in Essays in Sociological Theory (New York: Macmillan, 1949). 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



223 



Sex Differences in Socialization," by Berry, Bacon, and Child, whose orien- 
tation is comparative cultural anthropology, and another called "Family Struc- 
ture and Sex Role Learning by Children," by Orville G. Brim Jr., whose 
point of view derives from social psychology. 207 Both shall be analyzed at 
length so that their logic may be fully explored; their representative char- 
acter will be established by short quotations affirming their position from 
comparable sources. 208 Both articles were published in reputable professional 
journals (the first in the Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology and 
Tke American Anthropologist; the second in Sociometry~) before their in- 
clusion in a popular and influential college textbook, Selected Studies in 
Marriage and the Family, edited by Winch, McGinnis and Barringer, re- 
garded as reputable and widely used in many kinds of social science courses. 
The method of establishing representative opinion from the common de- 
nominator of college texts is the one used in C. Wright Mills's valuable study, 
"The Professional Ideology of Social Pathologists," 209 and can be de- 
fended on evident and logical grounds. This is how Mills describes the 
method: 

By virtue of the mechanism of sales and distribution, textbooks tend to embody 
a content agreed upon by the academic groups using them. In some cases texts 
have been written only after an informal poll was taken of professional opinion 
as to what should be included and other texts are consulted in the writing of a 
new one. Since one test of their success is wide adoption, the very spread of 
the public for which they are written tends to insure textbook tolerance of 
the commonplace. Only elements admitted into the more stable textbook for- 
mulations have come within my view: the aim is to grasp typical perspectives 
and key concepts. 210 



The first of our articles 211 agrees to the general liberal sociological recog- 
nition that "masculine" and "feminine" behavior is the result of long and 
careful years of "socialization," the conditioned product of reinforcement by 
punishment and reward. Yet it maintains that culture here only imitates or 
carries out the inevitable demands of nature. It is prone to the widespread 

207 Herbert Barry, HI, Margaret K. Bacon, and Irwin L. Child, "A Cross-cultural 
Survey of Some Sex Differences in Socialization," and Orville G. Brim, Jr., "Family 
Structure and Sex Role Learning by Children: A Further Analysis of Helen Koch's 
Data," in Selected Studies in Marriage and tfie Family, edited by Robert Winch, Robert 
McGinnis and Herbert Barringer (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 2nd ed., 
io6i). Three of the Eour authors hold academic positions, one at the University of Con- 
necticut, two at Yale University; the fourth is connected with the Russell Sage Foun- 
dation. 

208 g ee Appendix for further quotations. 

2 °9C. Wright Mills, "The Professional Ideology of Social Pathologists," (1943), 
Power, Politics and People (Oxford University Press, 1963). 

210 Ibid., p. 515. 

211 Barry, Bacon and Child, op. cil. 



224 SEXUAL POLITICS 

tactic of falling back on a biological mystique and maintaining that the order 
of things which it describes (often mistakenly) is in fact the very order of 
necessity. The article also conforms to the common habit of obscuring and 
romanticizing through the giving of names: female subservience is called 
"obedience, nurturance and responsibility." Male dominance is phrased as 
"self-reliance and achievement." 212 Anthropology is then invoked to justify 
this in terms of the activities of tribal life: "Participation in warfare, as a 
male prerogative, calls for self-reliance and a high order of skill where sur- 
vival or death is the immediate issue. The childbearing which is biologically 
assigned to women, and the child care which is socially assigned primarily 
to them, lead to nurturant behavior and often call for a more continuous 
responsibility than do tasks carried out by men. 213 There is really very little 
difference between this and Ruskin even as to the meaning of terms; only 
period style intervenes. The change is aesthetic rather than substantive. The 
first feminine trait mentioned, "obedience," is left without further explana- 
tion; perhaps it is better so. 

On the strength of such a model of the world, the male at war, the female 
in her hut responsible for the child, our social science team is satisfied to 
conclude that "most of these distinctions in adult role are not inevitable, but 
the biological differences between the sexes strongly predispose the distinction 
of role." 214 So far the language is still a bit tentative. 

To the layman it may appear abstruse that warfare is the inevitable bio- 
logical destiny of the male, just as it is difficult or obscure how "nurturance" 
is the lifelong biological destiny of all females if one has already conceded 
that while childbirth and breast-feeding are biological, child care itself is 
only culturally assigned to women. Furthermore, classic studies in cultural 
anthropology used to prove that there was a nearly infinite variety in the 
division of roles and of labor. It is also highly relevant to examine the Status 
line along which division of labor is established. In a culture where men 
weave and women fish, just as in a culture where men fish and women weave, 
ims axiomatic that whichever activity is assigned to the male is the activity 
with the greater prestige, power, status, and rewards. 215 

Having established the validity of their archetypal sex roles satisfactorily, 
it only remains to these authorities to insist that the conditioning be perva- 
sive and efficient; prescription swiftly follows on description: 

If each generation were left entirely to its own devices, therefore, without even 

212 Ibid., p. 274. 

213 Ibid., p. 270. Note that war is "achievement": child rearing is not. 
21 « Ibid. 

21 * Margaret Mead, "Prehistory and the Woman," Barnard College Bulletin, April 30, 
1969, Supplement p. 7: "One aspect of the social valuation of different types of labor is 
the differential prestige of men's activities and women's activities. Whatever men do-even 
if it is dressing dolls for religious ceremonies-is more prestigious than what women do and 
is treated as a higher achievement." 




THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



225 



an older generation to copy, sex differences in role would presumably be almost 
absent in childhood and would have to be developed after puberty at the expense 
of considerable relearning on the part of one or both sexes. 216 

Hence, the advocacy of every means of enforcing orthodoxy to the sex role 
stereotype, as such educated opinion is now convinced of its "useful func- 
tion" 217 and even more determined that deviance or lack of pressure may 
produce that state of misfortune they refer to as "discontinuities in cultural 
conditioning." 218 Our authors are pleased to end their investigation of this 
branch of the subject on a complacent note: "The differences in socialization 
between the sexes in our society, then, are no arbitrary custom of our society, 
but a very widespread adaptation of culture to the biological substratum of 
human life." 210 As warfare is cultural and so is the question of who cares 
for children, it is still very unclear what the biological substratum might be. 
But biology is a word to conjure by, particularly in the social sciences; a 
vague reference to the male's larger musculature is expected to silence criti- 
cism. It is also to be expected that, even though it is intellectually understood 
that (beyond breast-feeding) the assignment of child care is cultural rathet 
than biological, middle-class Americans will let that slip by and infer that 
childbirth must mean child care, the two together again constituting "biology." 
It is one of conservatism's favorite myths that every woman is a mother. 

Somehow the writers of this article are still insecure: the dubious dove- 
tailing of archetypal culture with the inevitability of biology does not ex- 
plain the present softening of sexual stereotype brought about by the in- 
dustrial revolution and the emancipation and education of women. They 
are faced now with a "nuclear" family in place of the virtues of the extended 
family and polygyny, two forms of social organization which they see in 
benign terms as cases of clearer and more sensible sex-role differentiation. Yet 
to admit to inutility in any aspect of a conservative and therefore desirable 
version of the present would be to admit defeat. Therefore the nuclear family 
is granted pragmatic sanction on the humorously specious grounds that in 
emergencies father and mother can "fill in" for each other. 220 

While vaguely aware that "our mechanized economy is perhaps less de- 
pendent than any previous economy upon the superior average strength of 
the male," 221 the authors are unable to admit that although a technological 
and capitalist culture puts a very low salary value on the muscle it at- 
tributes to the male, it never for a moment relinquishes male control. In fact, 
muscle is class— lower class. The difference between a stevedore and a scrub- 

210 Barry, Bacon and Child, op. cit., p. 270. 

2" Ibid. 

2 ia Ibid. 

218 Ibid. 

22 ° Ibid., p. 273. 

221 Ibid. 



226 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



woman, on the one hand, and an executive or physicist on the other, is a dif- 
ference measured in the one's confinement and the other's escape from 
physical labor; other factors at issue being education, economic power, and 
prestige. 

In the same fashion the article acknowledges that "the conditions favoring 
low sex differentiation appear to be more characteristic of the upper seg- 
ments of our society, in socioeconomic and educational status, than of lower 
segments." 222 What is actually meant is that some degree of privilege and 
education may be shared by both sexes in certain favored classes. The au- 
thors appear to be quite blind to the fact that the "biological mission" of full- 
time child rearing which they ascribe to the female is actually a modern 
and middle-class luxury. However much the working class is devoted to sexual 
status, it does nevertheless produce vast numbers of women engaged in 
menial work in and out of the home and a very large number of households 
headed by women employed in physically exhausting labor. But it does not 
appear to be this class of women, mere "lower segments," to whom the au- 
thors address themselves. To their middle-class bias such women are not 
competitors but cheap and useful labor. It is against the middle-class woman, 
at this moment a college student, that their wisdom is leveled, and its mes- 
sage is that she will limit her auxiliary role to "homemalcer." 

It is curious how reactionary thinking clings to "biology" as a desperate 
hope. Only in the area of sex is the position of an oppressed group still as- 
cribed to their physical nature, only here is biological difference still brought 
forward to explain and rationalize inferior status. 223 Having begun their dis- 
cussion with a fraudulent "open question"— "In the differential rearing of the 
sexes does our society make an arbitrary imposition on an infinitely plastic 
biological base, or is this cultural imposition found uniformly in all societies 
as an adjustment to the real biological differences between the sexes?" 224 
—the study comes out soundly in favor of the latter alternative. Although it 
puts up no actual evidence for its biological assumptions, it is determined 
that they form the real base of any division of labor role or temperament 
without reference to the far more crucial and probable elements of status, 
political, and economic power— factors far easier and more germane for social 
research to investigate than nebulous biological assumptions intended to 
elevate common wisdom to natural necessity. 

The article ends on a caveat, which is also something of an omen. Were 
its implicit suggestion put into effect, it would be a desperate recommenda- 
tion indeed. Sensing further insubordination within the society they would 
freeze and immobilize, and a continuing erosion of the old way, they have 
prepared themselves: "The increase in our society of conditions favoring small 

222 IHd. 

223 Jensen should probably be seen as an atavism, rather than an exception. 

224 Barry, Bacon and Child, op. tit., p. 267. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



227 



sex difference has led some people to advocate a virtual elimination of sex 
differences in socialization. This course seems dysfunctional even in our so- 
ciety." 225 As objective pragmatism is their announced philosophy, it is hard 
to believe that favorable conditions could also be dysfunctional; or that when 
the supposed need for a thing is palpably no longer present, it could still be 
functional to keep it about. One senses the writers' insecurity. It is not sur- 
prising that they now feel it necessary for the voice of authority to emerge at 
this point in somewhat axiomatic terms. Therefore a slightly dogmatic tone is 
adopted in adjudicating the following formula: "a differentiation of role simi- 
lar to the universal pattern of sex differences is an important and perhaps in- 
evitable development in any social group.""- 6 (One cannot help noting how 
handy a rule this might be in advocating class and caste divisions as well.) 
And now the clincher— biology: ". , . biological differences between the sexes 
make most appropriate the usual division of those roles between the sexes." 227 
Before this juggernaut all argument is expected to confess defeat; the division 
of labor by sexual status as well as the division of human personality by 
biological category may be permanently sanctioned. As a final admonition, 
the kibbutz is hauled on to convince one that failure to enforce sex role dif- 
ferentiation ends in failure altogether. Such radical change is both suspicious 
and drastic activity; nature is bound to assert itself and bring back the old 
methods. 

The authors cannot rest here. Like others of their kind, they perceive all 
about them threats to the stereotypes they are committed to defend and rein- 
force: every species of formal education, even the public school, is under- 
mining their efforts: 

In our training of children, there may now be less differentiation in sex role 
than characterizes adult life— so little indeed, as to provide inadequate prepara- 
tion for adulthood. This state of affairs is likely to be especially true of formal 
education, which is more subject to conscious influence by an ideology 
than is informal socialization at home. With childrearing being more ori- 
ented toward the male than the female role in adulthood, many of the 
adjustment problems of women in our society today may be partly traced to con- 
flicts growing out of inadequate childhood preparations for their adult role. 228 



This of course requires translation out of the bland abstract jargon of the 
trade. The subversive ideology referred to as corrupting formal education 
is, in fact, the egalitarianism still implicit in public schooling and even more 

aM Ibid., p. 274. 

a - 6 Ibid. (The authors are of course paraphrasing Talcott Parsons, the foremost au- 
thority of their school.) See Talcott Parsons and R. F. Bales, Family, Socialization and 
Interaction Process (New York, Free Press), (The remark appears to apply not only to 
the family, but to groups in general.) 

22 ' Ibid. 

228 Ibid. 



228 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



rampant at the universities— the heritage of the sexual revolution. The recom- 
mendation is clearly to eliminate this destructive attitude of intellectual parity 
from institutions of learning, which, our authors insist, are, by their very 
nature "oriented toward the male role." Here it is necessary to pause and 
consider that the male role has undergone a drastic change without notice 
being served to the reader. Suddenly and inexplicably, it is that of intel- 
lect where we had naively expected it to continue for all time as "biological" 
muscle. Unconsciously, our authors have slipped from tribal warfare and 
hunting, once so prestigious as to be male monopolies, whizzed past the 
industrial and technological revolutions, and landed squarely in the twen- 
tieth century, where learning is understood to be a newer male prerogative. 
They have foreseen the necessity of withdrawing woman from any education 
beyond the fairly stultifying sequestration they describe as "the informal so- 
cialization of the home," lest she fail to be perfectly conditioned and thereby 
end up in that deplorable state labeled "inadequately prepared for adult- 
hood." The implication forced upon the reader is that a university education 
is quite appropriate for the male yet damaging to the female since it is likely 
to produce "adjustment problems" or cases of arrested development (inade- 
quate preparation for adulthood). Under the guise of objective description, 
our authors would undo the work of the previous generation. The logical 
outcome of their suggestion is an end to higher education for women. 

To a dispassionate judge of reactionary tactic, functionalist formulation 
must appear a rather more admirable technique than the earlier and rather 
tarnished charge of penis envy. Like the latter, it points an accusatory finger 
of maladjustment at any woman who fails to conform to its arrogant program, 
but it avoids the openly invidious character of Freud's formula, and appears, 
through the very turgid cipher of its language, disinterested and beyond 
opinion. It also avoids pitfall references to sexual status without resorting to 
Ruskin's or Erikson's chivalrous fatuity. The spheres are separate still, iso- 
lated by "science" while this attack mumbles on, clinical and efficient, the 
arm of a blind justice, its prosaic jargon nearly negating meaning itself, yet 
remarkably successful at camouflaging even the most ambitiously regressive 
strictures in its deadening verbiage. 

If the orthodoxy of sex role as social benefit as well as biological neces- 
sity is inculcated successfully, it is not very difficult for this type of expe- 
dient "science" to survey the present population, assign traits to each group, 
gloss them in a blurred and neutral-seeming terminology, and imply that, 
while subject to variation and gradation, they are in some way inherently 
sex-linked. As "biology" determined sex role in the previous study, it will hover 
helpfully in the background of the next study 228 to assure that what are, in 
fact, the assigned characteristics of two political classes must also, even if 

M » Brim, op. tit. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



229 



acquired, be nature as well. In Brim's "Survey of Some Sex Differences in 
Socialization," the author has hardly any need for prescription. Although he 
js anxious that sex role be properly absorbed, his main interest is simply to 
define it. The normal will not neglect to leam. 

For if one accepts masculine as male, feminine as female, and if one al- 
lows sociology to define masculine and feminine one is caught in the biolog- 
ical trap again. It might be too clearly invidious if "workers" in the area 
stated outright that the male was "tenacious," "aggressive," "ambitious," "a 
good planner," "responsible," "original," and "self-confident," and the female, 
who should be all "obedience," "cheerfulness," and "friendliness," is in fact 
all too often given to "quarrelsomeness," is "revengeful," "exhibitionist," "un- 
cooperative," "negative," and a "tattler." 23 ' Therefore authorities in the field 
have hit upon the expedient of a mediating terminology. We are indebted 
to Talcott Parsons, 281 the leading functionalist and chief source of inspira- 
tion behind our studies for the insight that the male is "instrumental," and the 
traits of aggressiveness, originality, etc., are only instrumental traits which 
do and should happen also to be male in that they "pertain to the male 
role." The female is designated by the euphemism "expressive," and it is the 
expressive which is obedient, cheerful, friendly, etc. While "instrumental" 
translates easily to the older, more obviously prejudicial category of intel- 
lectual capacity and mastery, "expressive" is but a new name for emotional. 
Parsons is perhaps not an original thinker here. Yet there is much to com- 
mend in this device, for without some such polite intervening semantics, 
the list of female traits might read like misogyny; devoid of some linguistic 
cushion it might give rise to ridicule. 

The table itself is sufficiently quaint to merit reproduction. It appears to be 
the work of Orville G. Brim, Jr., himself, but based on data and ideas pro- 
vided by Koch, Parsons, Terman, and Tyler. 

This catalogue provides the unhurried reader with ample material for 
speculation. It is in fact a perfect paradigm of class. While to the male is 
assigned every virtue of human rationality, the preponderance of traits valued 
by the very society in which he predominates, there is yet sufficient candor 
and self-criticism to admit that he is capable of the faintheartedness of 
"dawdling and procrastinating" as well as the venial offense of "wavering in 
decision." Here is honest admission of the ardors of persevering in the role of 
a superior caste. Under the beguiling rubric of "expressive" is ascribed to the 
female nearly every conceivable vice of character. One recalls not only the 
misogynous tradition but the seven deadly sins. 

Perhaps nothing is so depressing an index of the inhumanity of the male- 

230 See the table which follows. 

231 Talcott Parsons and R. F. Bales, of. at. The "traits" themselves were arrived at 
with the help of Parsons' theory, "professional persons" acting as judges, and then checked 
with the criteria of Terman and Tyler's 'Psychological Sex Differences," Manual of Child 
Psychology ([2nd. ed.) (New York: Wiley, 1954). 




Table i 232 

Traits Assignable to Male (Instrumental) 

or Female (Expressive) Roles 





Pertains primarily 


Trait is congruent (+) 


Trait 


to instrumental (I) 


or incongruent (— ) 




or Expressive 


(E) role 


characteristic of role 


1 Tenacity 






+ 


2 Aggressiveness 






+ 


3 Curiosity 






+ 


4 Ambition 






+ 


5 Planfufness 






+ 


6 Dawdling and procrastinating 








7 Responsibleness 






+ 


8 Originality 






+ 


9 Competitiveness 






+ 


io Wavering in decision 








ii Self-confidence 






+ 


12. Anger 


E 






13 Quarrelsomeness 


E 







14 Revengefulness 


E 







15 Teasing 


E 







16 Extrapunitiveness 


E 







17 Insistence on rights 


E 







18 Exhibitionism 


E 







1 9 Uncooperativeness with group 


E 







20 Affectionateness 


E 




+ 


21 Obedience 


E 




+ 


22 Upset by defeat 


E 






23 Responds to sympathy and 








approval from adults 


E 




+ 


24 Jealousy 


E 






25 Speedy recovery from 








emotional disturbance 


E 




+ 


26 Cheerfulness 


E 




+ 


27 Kindness 


E 




+ 


28 Friendliness to adults 


E 




+ 


29 Friendliness to children 


E 




+ 


30 Negativism 


E 






31 Tattling 


E 




— 



232 Brim, op. cit., p. 282. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



231 



supremacist mentality as the fact that the more genial human traits are as- 
signed to the underclass: affection, response to sympathy, kindness, cheerful- 
ness. There are a host of what would be termed "nutritive" feminine 
functions implicit here which it appears the male has ascribed to the female 
because he disregards their value and utility in himself, preferring they 
exist in his opposite only that they may cater to his needs. Such a table is a 
fairly startling revelation of the approved relationship between the sexes 
and a more accurate index of cultural values than one is generally able to 
come at. If the Chicago school children who were tested for its efficacy were 
to live up to the demands of its opprobrious "roles," one could find no more 
convincing proof of the powers of negative behavioral engineering on child- 
hood. But somehow the machinery has failed to get very creditable results. 233 
The expected docility is sometimes present— girls are, as they are expected 
to be, "obedient"— such indeed is the "congruent characteristic" of their "role," 
obligingly stated in the right-hand column. But they are also given to anger, 
jealousy, a desire to revenge themselves, a refusal to co-operate, and perhaps 
most distressing of all, an "insistence on their rights." 

To arrive at the political implications of the table, one has only to exchange 
its categories with other political classes. Were one to substitute black and 
white for male and female, one would have a perfect picture of both the 
expectation and the assumed conditions of a racist society. The obedience and 
good nature white expects from black would be accounted for, as well as 
white's dismay to find it accompanied with vengefulness, anger, and a refu- 
sal to co-operate. The same holds true of aristocrat and peasant; the former 
typically fancying himself an intellectual governor and seeing in the latter 
a warm and jovial servant, but one, alas, given to surliness, petty dodges, 
"tattling," and frequent insubordination. The table just as adequately re- 
flects the good and evil of capitalist ethics; superiority and intellect on the 
side of the winning team and greedy spite on the other. 

It would be irrelevant to dilate upon the arbitrary character of this divi- 
sion of human nature, just as it would be unprofitable to wonder how such 
things as tenacity are measured and by what standards they are judged. 834 
Yet all unconscious of the insights it affords, the table is a superb analysis 

233 Brim apologizes that at five years of age they are too young to be proficient; the 
males are as yet impracticed and debilitated by maternal attachment, elder sisters, and 
other handicaps to echo their fathers as they should and will. He deplores certain cases: 
"for the boy with the older sister the acquisition of feminine traits would seem to have 
displaced rather than simply diluted his masculinity" (p. 286). Yet he appears to regard 
any widespread, long-lasting nonconformity as an "implausibility" (p. 287). 

23 * Brim gives it all away by revealing that the whole assessment of the child's pos- 
session of a trait was made by kindergarten teachers, sitting in private and subjective 
judgment on their charges. When one comprehends that the table is the collective achieve- 
ment of the prejudices of these persons in conjunction with the unconscious sexual- 
political impressions of the social scientists who invented and assigned the traits, one has 
understood much. The study is a study of itself. 



23 z 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



of master class values, those it invents for itself and those it assigns to the 
under class it shapes and controls. The governing virtues of a sovereign 
caste are clearly outlined, with the usual admission that the ruling group is 
often not sufficiently sure and certain in its dominance. The vices of the 
oppressed and all their serviceable virtues are acknowledged, with the usual 
implication that the under class could be much more ingratiating in its place 
and is expected to bear its ignoble status with a better fortitude and a more 
accommodating mien than it does. Needless to say, in view of the pressure 
and concern over children who fail to "adopt" to their role, the table registers 
prescription as well as expectation. 235 While the scheme is of no use in de- 
termining either human or sexual nature, it is a frank, albeit unwitting 
statement of the actual status of male and female in patriarchy. 

Thus sociology examines the status quo, calls it phenomena, and pretends 
to take no stand on it, thereby avoiding the necessity to comment on the 
invidious character of the relationship between the sex groups it studies. Yet 
by slow degrees of converting statistic to fact, function to prescription, bias 
to biology (or some other indeterminate), it comes to ratify and rationalize 
what has been socially enjoined or imposed into what is and ought to be. 
And through its pose of objectivity, it gains a special efficacy in reinforcing 
stereotypes. Seeing that failure to conform leads to "problems" and "con- 
flicts" as well as other situations it regards as highly undesirable deviant be- 
havior, it counsels a continuous and vigilant surveillance of conditioning that 
it may proceed on lines of greater proficiency and perfection. 

Finally, it has the devastating question of identity with which to threaten 
its subjects. Young boys whose virtually only permitted self is their maleness 
are continuously harassed by the danger or the accusation of losing their 
"masculinity." And the same psycho-social coercion is applied to girls as well, 
A painful identity crisis is thereby imposed upon every member of either 
group— to fail to be adequately masculine or feminine is to fail to be true to 
one's nature. And as we are bom undoubtedly male or female, we imagine 
that should we lose the certainty of gender identity we may fail to exist; gen- 
der identity being the primary identity allowed to children as to adults. Girls 
who are seen as already imperfect in conformity, "maladjusted," etc. (in 
Brim's study the minus signs for girls are six times the number awarded to 
boys) evidently through public schooling and the residual lip service occa- 
sionally still paid to the sexual revolution's ideal of equality in opportunity 
and education, are in imminent danger of emerging from their stereotype. 

235 It is interesting to note that Brim's actual purpose in the article was to demon- 
strate how the number and age of siblings in a family reinfoice or fail to reinforce the 
proper traits of masculinity. Curiously, "responsibleness" is in this study a masculine 
trait, whereas the other study found it one of the prime characteristics of the female; con- 
sistency is perhaps too much to ask where there is otherwise so much agreement. 



THE COUNTERREVOLUTION 



*33 



That this possibility have the full force of catastrophe about it, it is con- 
tinuously equated with a refusal to perform the biological function of child- 
bearing, endlessly confused and equated with the whole burden of child 
rearing. Girls are imprisoned in the familiar triad of passivity, masochism, 
and narcissism by which their whole personality is defined. Boys are also 
confined by the stereotypical dominance prescribed for them lest they wan- 
der into henpeckery or homosexuality. Functionalists, like other reactionaries, 
are out to save the family. 

As the whole subject of sex is covered with shame, ridicule and silence, any 
failure to conform to stereotype reduces the individual, especially if a child, 
to an abysmal feeling of guilt, unworthiness, and confusion. In the period of 
the counterrevolution, adherence to sexual stereotype became, in all fields of 
activity, including literature and literary criticism, a new morality; good and 
evil, virtue, sympathy, judgment, disapprobation, were a matter of one's sex- 
ual conformity according to category. Scarcely any ideology can lay claim 
to such merciless, total, and seemingly irrefutable control over its victims. 
Despite the assumption of inevitable membership by birth (the starting point 
of ideology) the burden of proof shifts, in fact, to each individual. Unaltera- 
bly bom into one group or another, every subject is forced, moment to mo- 
ment, to prove he or she is, in fact, male or female by deference to the 
ascribed characteristics of masculine and feminine. 

There is no way out of such a dilemma but to rebel and be broken, stig- 
matized, and cured. Until the radical spirit revives to free us, we remain 
imprisoned in the vast gray stockades of the sexual reaction. Our subject 
is now some of those who helped to build these structures— writers, who, 
after the usual manner of cultural agents, both reflected and actually shaped 
attitudes. So we proceed to the counterrevolutionary sexual politicians them- 
selves—Lawrence, Miller, and Mailer. 



Ill 

THE J^ITERART 
"REFLECTION 




FIVE 



T>. H. J^awrence 



I Devotional 

"Let me see you!" 

He dropped the shirt and stood still, looking towards her. The sun through 
the low window sent a beam that lit up his thighs and slim belly, and the erect 
phallus rising darkish and hot-looking from the little cloud of vivid gold-red 
hair. She was startled and afraid. 

"How strange!" she said slowly. "How strange he stands there! So big! and so 
dark and cocksure! Is he like that?" 

The man looked down the front of his slender white body, and laughed. Be- 
tween the sUrn breasts the hair was dark, almost black. But at the root of the 
belly, where the phallus rose thick and arching, it was gold-red, vivid in a litde 
cloud. 

"So proud!" she murmured, uneasy. "And so lordly! Now I know why men 
are so overbearing. But he's lovely, really. Like another being! A bit terrifying! 
But lovely really! And he comes to me.'—" She caught her lower lip between her 
teeth, in fear and excitement. 

The man looked down in silence at his tense phallus, that did not change. 
. . . "Cunt, that's what tha'rt after. Tell lady Jane tha' wants cunt. John 
Thomas, an' th' cunt o' lady Jane!—" 

"Oh, don't tease him," said Connie, crawling on her knees on the bed towards 
him and putting her arms round his white slender loins, and drawing him to 
her so that her hanging swinging breasts touched the top of the stirring, erect 
phallus, and caught the drop of moisture. She held the man fast. 



JL 



238 SEXUAL POLITICS 

"Lie down!" he said. "Lie down! Let me come!" 
He was in a hurry now. 1 

Lady Chatterley's Lover is a quasi-religious tract recounting the salvation 
of one modern woman (the rest are irredeemably "plastic" and "celluloid") 
through the offices of the author's personal cult, "the mystery of the phallus." 2 
This passage, a revelation of the sacrament itself, is properly the novel's very 
holy of holies— a transfiguration scene with atmospheric clouds and lighting, 
and a pentecostal sunbeam (the sun is phallic to Lawrence's apprehension) 
illuminating the ascension of the deity "thick and arching" before the rever- 
ent eyes of the faithful. 

Lawrence's working title for the book was "Tenderness," and although 
Oliver Mellors, the final apotheosis of Lawrentian man, is capable of some 
pretty drastic sexual animosities (he'd rather like to "liquidate" all lesbians, 
and what Freudians would call "clitoroidal" women, en masse, together with 
his own former wife), one still finds in this novel little of the sexual violence 
and ruthless exploitation so obtrusive in Mailer and Miller, nor, for that mat- 
ter, the honest recognition of sexual caste one encounters in Genet. With 
Lady Chatterley, Lawrence seems to be making his peace with the female, and 
in one last burst of passion proposing a reconciliation for the hostilities em- 
barked upon with the composition of Aaron's Rod in 191 8, nearly ten years 
before. Compared with the novels and short stories which preceded it, this 
last work appears almost an act of atonement. And so Constance Chatterley is 
granted sight of the godhead, 3 which turns out to be a portrait of the creator 
himself, nude, and in his most impressive state. Whereas the mood of Kanga- 
roo, Aaron's Hod, and The Plumed Serpent is homoerotic, here it is 
narcissistic. 

In Lady Chatterley, as throughout his final period, Lawrence uses the 
words "sexual" and "phallic" interchangeably, so that the celebration of sexual 
passion for which the book is so renowned is largely a celebration of the penis 
of Oliver Mellors, gamekeeper and social prophet. While insisting bis mission 
is the noble and necessary task of freeing sexual behavior of perverse inhibi- 
tion, purging the fiction which describes it of prurient or prudish euphemism, 
Lawrence is really the evangelist of quite another cause— "phallic conscious- 
ness." This is far less a matter of "the resurrection of the body," "natural 
love," or other slogans under which it has been advertised, than the transfor- 
mation of masculine ascendancy into a mystical religion, international, pos- 
sibly institutionalized. This is sexual politics in its most overpowering form, 

1 D. H. Lawrence, Lady Chatterley's Lover (1928). (New York: Random House, 

1957), PP- 237-38- 

2 Ibid,, p. 238. 

3 It had been Lawrence's consistent practice to veil the sanctities of sex in vague phrases 
about cosmic flight, movement into space, and so forth, while the trademark adjective 
droned its tedious "deep, deep, deep" refrain at the reader. Lady Chatterley contains the 
only wholly explicit sexual descriptions in his work. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



239 



but Lawrence is the most talented and fervid of sexual politicians. He is the 
most subde as well, for it is through a feminine consciousness that his mascu- 
line message is conveyed. It is a woman, who, as she gazes, informs us that 
the erect phallus, rising phoenixlike from its aureole of golden pubic hair is 
indeed "proud" and "lordly"-and above all, "lovely." "Dark and cocksure" 
it is also "terrifying" and "strange," liable to give rise in women to "fear" as 
well as "excitement"— even to uneasy murmurs. At the next erection, Connie 
and the author-narrator together inform us the penis is "overweening," "tower- 
ing" and "terrible." 4 Most material of all, an erection provides the female with 
irrefutable evidence that male supremacy is founded upon the most real and 
uncontrovertible grounds. A diligent pupil, Connie supplies the catechist's 
dutiful response, "Now I know why men are so overbearing." With the ecstasy 
of the devout, a parody of a loving woman's rapture and delight, she finds 
the godhead both frightening and sublime. Lawrence's own rather sadistic 
insistence on her intimidation before biological event is presumably another 
proof of inherent female masochism. One cannot help admiring the tech- 
nique: "But he's lovely, really ... A bit terrifying! But lovely really! And he 
comes to me/"— out of the mouth of the inamorata the most abject piety. It is 
no wonder Simone de Beauvoir shrewdly observed that Lawrence spent his 
life writing guidebooks for women." Constance Chatterley is as good a per- 
sonification of counterrevolutionary wisdom as Marie Bonaparte. 

Even Mellors is impressed, pleased to refer to his penis in the third person, 
coyly addressing it in dialect: 

Ay ma lad! Tha'rt theer right enough. Yi, tha nun rear they head! Theer on thy 
own ey? an ta'es no count 0' nob'dy . . . Dost want her? Dost want my lady 
Jane? . . . Say: Lift up your heads, . . . that the king of glory may come in. 6 



John Thomas, this active miracle, is hardly matched by lady Jane, mere pas- 
sive "cunt." Praise for this commodity is Mellors' highest compliment to his 
mistress; "Th'art good cunt, though, aren't ter? Best bit 0' cunt left on earth 
. . . Cunt! It's thee down theer; an' what I get when I'm i'side thee . . . 
Cunt! Eh, that's the beauty o' thee, lass." 7 The sexual mystery to which the 
novel is dedicated is scarcely a reciprocal or co-operative event— it is simply 
phallic. Mellors' penis, even when deflated, is still "that which had been the 
power:" Connie moaning with "a sort of bliss" is its "sacrifice" and a "new- 
bom thing." 8 Although the male is displayed and admired so often, diere is, 
apart from the word cunt, no reference to or description of the female geni- 

4 D. H. Lawrence, Lady Chatterley's Lover, p. 238. 

6 Simone de Beauvoir, The Second. Sex (New York: Knopf, 1953), p. 209. 

e Lawrence, ojj, cit., p. 237. 

11 Ibid,, p. 201. 

s Ibid,, p. 197. 



24° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



tals: they are hidden, shameful and subject. 9 Male genitals are not only the 
aesthetic standard, ". . . the balls between his legs! What a mystery! What a 
strange heavy weight of mystery . . . The roots, root of all that is lovely, the 
primeval root of all full beauty," 10 they become a species of moral standard as 
well: "The root of all sanity is in the balls." 11 Yet all that is disreputable, even 
whole classes of society, are anathematized by the words "female" or "fem- 
inine." 

The scenes of sexual intercourse in the novel are written according to the 
"female is passive, male is active" directions laid down by Sigmund 
Freud. The phallus is all; Connie is "cunt," the thing acted upon, gratefully 
accepting each manifestation of the will of her master. Mellors does not even 
condescend to indulge his lady in foreplay. She enjoys an orgasm when she 
can, while Mellors is managing his own. If she can't, then too bad. Passive 
as she is, Connie fares better than the heroine of The Plumed Serpent, from 
whom Lawrentian man, Don Cipriano, deliberately withdraws as she nears 
orgasm, in a calculated and sadistic denial of her pleasure: 

By a swift dark instinct, Cipriano drew away from this in her. When, in their 
love, it came back on her, the seething electric female ecstasy, which knows 
such spasms of delirium, he recoiled from her. ... By a dark and powerful 
instinct he drew away from her as soon as this desire rose again in her, for the 
white ecstasy of fractional satisfaction, the throes of Aphrodite of the foam. 
She could see that to him, it was repulsive. He just removed himself, dark and 
unchangeable, away from her. 12 

Lawrentian sexuality seems to be guided by somewhat the same principle one 
finds expressed in Rainwater's study of the working class (also the doctrine 
of the nineteenth-century middle classes)— "sex is for the man." 13 Lawrence's 
knowledge of Freud was sketchy and secondhand, but he appears to be well 
acquainted with the theories of female passivity and male activity and doubt- 
less found them very convenient. Ladies— even when they are "cunt"— don't 
move. In both novels there are a number of severe reprimands delivered 
against subversive female "friction." 

The sexual revolution had done a great deal to free female sexuality. An 
admirably astute politician, Lawrence saw in this two possibilities: it could 

9 This is true despite the great insight Lawrence displays about the nature o£ sexual 
inhibition and prurience, brutality and shame in A Propos Lady Chatterley's Lover and 
in his other critical essays on sex and censorship. Here, too, he is busy affirming that the 
phallus is not only the bridge to the future, but the very essence of marriage and life 
itself. His silence as regards to female genitals is most remarkable, and evidence, I believe, 
of considerable inhibition and very probably of strongly negative feelings. In Henry Millet 
one encounters the same phenomenon in a more severe form. 

10 Ibid., p. 197. 

11 Ibid., p. 246. 

12 D. H. Lawrence, The Plumed Serpent (1923). (New York: Knopf, 195O, P- 4^3' 

13 Lee Rainwater, And the Poor Get Children (Chicago: Quadrangle, i960). 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



241 



grant women an autonomy and independence he feared and hated, or it 
could be manipulated to create a new order of dependence and subordination, 
another form of compliance to masculine direction and prerogative. The 
frigid woman of the Victorian period was withholding assent, the "new 
woman," could, if correctly dominated, be mastered in bed as everywhere 
else. The Freudian school had promulgated a doctrine of "feminine fulfill- 
ment," "receptive" passivity, the imaginary "adult" vaginal orgasm which some 
disciples even interpreted as forbidding any penile contact with the clitoris. 
Notions of this kind could become, in Lawrence's hands, superb instru- 
ments for the perfect subjection of women. 

In thanksgiving for her lover's sexual prowess, Lady Chatterley goes out 
into the rain before their hut to dance what the reader recognizes to be a 
mime of King David's naked gyrations before the Lord. Watching her, Mel- 
lors understands her to be performing a "kind of homage toward him," while 
"repeating a wild obeisance." 14 Such satisfaction as she is granted by the 
lordly gamekeeper has converted her to a "wonderful cowering female" whose 
flashing haunches Mellors perceives in terms of prey. Accordingly, he stirs 
himself to the chase. Having pursued and caught her, "he tipped her up and 
fell with her on the path, in the roaring silence of the rain, short and sharp, 
he took her, short and sharp and finished, like an animal." 18 

Lawrence is a passionate believer in the myth of nature which has ordained 
that female personality is congenital, even her shame not the product of con- 
ditioning, but innate. Only the "sensual fire" of the "phallic hunt" can rout 
this "old, old physical fear which crouches in the bodily roots." On the oc- 
casion when Lady Chatterley submits to Mellors' anal penetration, we are 
told that "She would have thought a woman would have died of shame. In- 
stead of which the shame died . . . she had needed this phallic hunting out, 
she had secretly wanted it, and she had believed that she would never get 
it." The "phallus alone" is competent to explore the "core of the physical 
jungle, the last and deepest recess of organic shame." 18 Having reached the 
'bedrock of her nature," the heroine breaks off momentarily to preach to the 
reader that the poets were "liars": "They made one think one wanted senti- 
ment. When one supremely wanted this piercing, consuming, rather awful 
sensuality . . . The supreme pleasure of the mind! And what is that to a 
woman?" 17 Lawrence has killed three birds here, the bluestocking, the 
courtly pose, and, it would seem, his own sodomous urges. 18 Although Con- 

14 Lawrence, Lady Chatterley's Lover, p. 750. 

ls Ibid., pp. 250—51. 

18 Ibid., pp. 280-81. 

"Ibid., p. 281. 

18 One remembers that Mellors' first love was his colonel. With the exception of Sons 
and Lovers and The Rainbow, every Lawrence novel includes some symbolically surrogate 
scene of pederasty: the rubdowns in The White Peacock and Aaron's Rod, the consecra- 
tion scene in The Plumed Serpent, the kiss denied in Kangaroo and the wrestling scene 
in Women in Love. 




242 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



stance Chatteiley is more credibly a woman than most Lawrentian heroines 
(there are even casual references to her breasts and she becomes pregn ant 
with the hero's child), the erotic focus of the novel is constantly the mag- 
nificent Mellors, "remote," "wild animal," with some superior and "fluid male 
knowledge," the very personification of phallic divinity, described in caress- 
ing phrases which indicate Lawrence himself not only wishes to possess and 
partake of this power, but be possessed by it as well. 

Lady Chatterley's Lover is a program for social as well as sexual redemp- 
tion, yet the two are inextricable. Early in the novel, Tommy Dukes, one 
of the author's humbler mouthpieces, has deplored the fact that there are 
no "real" men and women left in the world, predicting the fall of civilization 
on this account. We are all doomed unless the one hope of redemption is 
understood immediately: "It's going down the bottomless pit, down the chasm. 
And believe me, the only bridge across the chasm will be the phallus! 19 The 
metaphor is an unhappy one; in respect of penile length, the future hardly 
seems promising. Yet the program the novel offers against the industrial hor- 
rors it describes with such verve and compassion, is a simple matter: men 
should adopt a costume of tight red trousers and short white jackets and the 
working class should cease to desire money. In a single elaboration, Mellors 
suggests they busy themselves with folk art and country dances. This would 
be cruel, if it were not ridiculous. While a sexual revolution, in terms of a 
change in attitudes, and even in psychic structure, is undoubtedly essential 
to any radical social change, this is very far from being what Lawrence has in 
mind. His recipe is a mixture of Morris and Freud, which would do away 
with machinery and return industrial England to something like the middle 
ages. Primarily the thing is to be accomplished by a reversion to older sexual 
roles. Modem man is ineffectual, modem woman a lost creature (cause and 
effect are interchangeable in these two tragedies]), and the world will only be 
put right when the male reassumes his mastery over the female in that total 
psychological and sensual domination which alone can offer her the "ful- 
fillment" of her nature. 

This is why the novel concentrates on rehabilitating Constance Chatterley 
through the phallic ministrations of the god Pan, incarnated in Mellors. In 
the novel's early chapters we are instructed that her only meaningful exist- 
ence is sexual and has been distorted by education and the indecent liberties 
of the modern woman. Married to an impotent husband, Connie mopes 
through some hundred and thirty pages of unfulfilled femininity. Neither a 
wife nor a mother, yearning for a child, her "womb" contracting at certain 
stated intervals, she seeks her fleeting youth in unsatisfactory trips to the 
mirror, and endless visits to some hen pheasants, whose "pondering female 
blood" rebukes "the agony of her own female forlomness" 20 while affording 
her some solace by being "the only things in the world that warmed her 

19 Lawrence, Lady Chatterley's Lover, p. 82. 
2(1 Ibid., p. 127. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



243 



heart." 21 In the presence of these formidable creatures she "feels herself on 
the brink of fainting all the time," 22 and the sight of a pheasant chick break- 
ing its shell reduces her to hysterical weeping. In the best tradition of sen- 
timental narrative we first see "a tear fall on her wrist," followed by the 
information that "she was crying blindly in all the anguish of her generation's 
forlomness . . . her heart was broken and nothing mattered any more."- 3 
Thereupon Mellors intervenes out of pity ("compassion flamed in his bowels 
for her") and he invites her into the hut for a bit of what she needs. 

He is characteristically peremptory in administering it: "You lie there," he 
orders. She accedes with a "queer obedience" 24 — Lawrence never uses the 
word female in the novel without prefacing it with the adjectives "weird" or 
"queer:" this is presumably done to persuade the reader that woman is a dim 
prehistoric creature operating out of primeval impulse. Mellors concedes 
one kiss on the navel and then gets to business: 

And he had to come into her at once, to enter the peace on earth of that soft, 
quiescent body. It was the moment of pure peace for him, the entry into the 
body of a woman. She lay still, in a kind of sleep, always in a kind of sleep. 
The activity, the orgasm was all his, all his; she could strive for herself no 
more.- J 

Of course Mellors is irreproachably competent and sexuality comes natu- 
rally to him. But the female, though she is pure nature to whom civilized 
thought or activity were a travesty, must somehow be taught. Constance has 
had the purpose of her existence ably demonstrated for her, but her conver- 
sion must take a bit longer: 

Her tormented modem-woman's brain still had no rest. Was it real? And she 
knew, if she gave herself to the man, it was real. But if she kept herself for her- 
self, it was nothing. She was old; millions of years old, she felt. And at last, she 
could bear the burden of herself no more. She was to be had for the taking. 
To be had for the taking. 28 

What she is to relinquish is self, ego, will, individuality— things woman had 
but recently developed— to Lawrence's profoundly shocked distaste. He con- 
ceived his mission to be their eradication. Critics are often misled to fancy 
that he recommends both sexes cease to be hard struggling little wills and 
egoists. Such is by no means the case. Mellors and other Lawrentian heroes 
incessantly exert their wills over women and the lesser men it is their mission 

21 Ibid., p. 126. 

22 lhid., p. 1 27. 

23 Ibid., p. 1 29. 

24 Ibid., p. 130. 
M Ibid., p. 130. 
28 lbii., pp. 130-31. 



244 SEXUAL POLITICS 

to nile. It is unthinkable to Lawrence that males should ever cease to be 
domineering individualists. Only women must desist to be selves. Constance 
Chatterley was her husband's typist and assistant: she only ceases to serve 
this unworthy master when she becomes Mellors' disciple and farm wife. At 
no point is she given the personal autonomy of an occupation, and Lawrence 
would probably find the suggestion obscene. Even in the guise of a servant, 
Mellors has infinite assurance and a solid identity; Lady Chatterley appears 
an embarrassed impostor beside him. 

Under the conventions of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century novel 
gentlemen entered into exploitative sexual liaisons with serving maids. Law- 
rence appears to have reversed this class relation by coupling the lady with 
her manservant, and his book is said to display an eloquent democracy by 
asserting that the class system is an "anachronism." Yet Mellors, a natural 
gentleman and therefore Lord Chatterley's superior, is just as great a snob 
as Connie, whose sermons mouth Lawrence's own disgust with the prole- 
tariat from whence he was saved by virtue of exceptional merit. Mellors also 
despises his own class, The lovers have not so much bridged class as tran- 
scended it into an aristocracy based presumably on sexual dynamism rather 
than on wealth or position. The very obnoxious Lord Chatterley represents 
the insufferable white male of the master caste, pretending to be worthy of 
the term "ruling class." Mellors and Lawrence are bom outsiders to the priv- 
ileged white man's general sway of empire, mine ownership, and the many 
other prerogatives of a male elite. But this has not persuaded them to over- 
throw so much as to envy, imitate, and covet. Rather in the manner of a black 
who is so corroded with white values that his grandest aspiration is sexual 
acceptance by the white woman, Lawrence's dark outsiders, whether Mexican 
Indian or Derbyshire collier, focus their ambition on the "white man's 
woman"— the Lady. Women of his own class and kind are beneath his con- 
tempt; the crudest caricatures in the novel are Bertha Coutts and Mrs. Bol- 
ton, from whom Mellors withholds himself in rigid distaste— they are 
unbearably "common." Dissatisfaction with Clifford Chatterley's impersona- 
tion of the "ruling class" has by no means cured Lawrence of his allegiance to 
such a notion; to a large extent, his wish is only to install himself in this posi- 
tion. His plan is to begin by suborning the lady-class female, a feat which 
should give him courage to subordinate other males. Then he may enter upon 
his inheritance as natural aristocrat. Immersed in the ancient fantasy that he 
had the wrong father, he has converted his own father into a god; for in ad- 
dition to being Lawrence himself and a desirable homosexual lover, Mellors is 
also supposed to be the surly and unpleasant miner of Sons and Lovers, Law- 
rence senior, rehabilitated and transformed into Pan. As it is improbable 
Mellors can acquire the artistic prestige or political power of other Lawren- 
tian heroes, who are famous writers or generals, he is to be exalted by purely 
religious means. And although he is a social prophet, even this form of bet- 
tering his position is given litde emphasis. Instead, he bases his entire claim 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



245 



upon John Thomas. The possession of a penis is itself an accomplishment 
of such high order (with the unimportant exception of a Venetian laborer 
who appears on only one page, no other male in the book gives any evidence 
of potency) that Mellors' divine nature is revealed and established through 
this organ alone. 

When he began to compose his last novel, Lawrence was suffering in the 
final stages of tuberculosis. After The Plumed Serpent he admitted to being 
weary of the 'leader cum follower" bit and had despaired of political suc- 
cess. 27 All other avenues of grandeur appeared to be closed. Public power 
was a delusion, only sexual power remained. If the last Lawrentian hero is 
to have but one apostle to glorify him, let it be a woman. Sexual politics is a 
surer thing than the public variety between males. For all the excursions into 
conventional political fascism that occupy the middle and late period of his 
work, it was the politics of sex which had always commanded Lawrence's 
attention most, both as the foundation and as a stairway to other types of self- 
aggrandizement. Lady Chatterley's Lover is as close as Lawrence could get 
to a love story. It is also something of a cry of defeat, perhaps even of remorse, 
in a man who had aspired rather higher, but had to settle for what he could 
get. As a handbook of sexual technique to accompany a mood of reaction in 
sexual politics, it was not altogether a failure. 

II Oedipal 

In a letter to Edward Garnett written in 19 12, Lawrence provided his own 
description of Sons and Lovers: 



A woman of character and refinement goes into the lower class, and has no 
satisfactions in her own life. She has had a passion for her husband, so the chil- 
dren are born of passion, and have heaps of vitality. But as her sons grow up, 
she selects them as lovers— first the eldest, then the second. These sons are 
urged into fife by their reciprocal love of their mother— urged on and on. 
But when they come to manhood, they can't love, because their mother is the 
strongest power in their fives, and holds them ... As soon as the young men 
come into contact with women there is a split. William gives his sex to a fribble, 
and his mother holds his soul. But the split kills him, because he doesn't 
know where he is. The next son gets a woman who fights for his soul— fights his 
mother. The son loves the mother— all the sons hate and are jealous of the 

27 D. H. Lawrence, The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, edited by Aldous Huxley ([New 
York: Viking, 1932), p. 719. To Witter Bynner, Match 13, 1928: 

"1 sniffed the red herring in your last letter a long time: then at last decided it's a live 
sprat. I mean about The Plumed Serpent and "the hero," On the whole, I think you're 
right. The hero is obsolete, and the leader of men is a back number . . . the leader- 
cum-followet relationship is a bore. And the new relationship will be some sort of ten- 
derness, sensitive, between men and men and men and women, and not the one up, one 
down, lead on I follow, ich dien sort of business. . . . But still, in a way, one has to 
fight ... I feel one still has to fight for the phallic reality . . ." 




246 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



father. The battle goes on between the mother and the girl, with the son as 
object. The mother gradually proves the stronger, because of the tie of blood. 
The son decides to leave his soul in his mother's hands, and like his elder 
brother, go for passion. He gets passion. Then the split begins to tell again. But 
almost unconsciously, the mother realizes what is the matter and begins to die 
The son casts off his mistress, attends to his mother dying. He is left in the end 
naked of everything, with the drift toward death. 28 

In the same letter Lawrence assured Gamett this would be a great book. 
Both the precis and the boast have truth, but the latter has more of it. Sows 
and Lovers is a great novel because it has the ring of something written from 
deeply felt experience. The past remembered, it conveys more of Lawrence's 
own knowledge of life than anything else he wrote. His other novels appear 
somehow artificial beside it. 

Paul Morel is of course Lawrence himself, treated with a self-regarding 
irony which is often adulation: "He was solitary and strong and his eyes 
had a beautiful light" 28 ; "She saw him, slender and firm, as if the setting 
sun had given him to her. A deep pain took hold of her, and she knew she 
must love him"— and so forth. 30 In the precis, Lawrence (and his critics 
after him) have placed all the emphasis in this tale of the artist as an am- 
bitious young man, upon the spectral role his mother plays in rendering htm 
incapable of complete relations with women his own age-his sexual or emo- 
tional frigidity. That the book is a great tribute to his mother and a moving 
record of the strongest and most formative love of the author's life, is, of 
course, indisputable. For all their potential morbidity, the idyllic scenes of 
the son and mother's walking in the fields, their excited purchases of a flower 
or a plate and their visit to Lincoln cathedral, are splendid and moving, as 
only Sons and Lovers, among the whole of Lawrence's work, has the power 
to move a reader. But critics have also come to see Mrs. Morel as a devouring 
maternal vampire as well, smothering her son with affection past the years 
of his need of it, and Lawrence himself has encouraged this with the self- 
pitying defeatism of phrases such as "naked of everything," "with the drift 
toward death," and the final chapter heading "Derelict." 31 

The preas itself is so determinedly Freudian, after the fact as it were, 32 
that it neglects the two other levels at which the novel operates— both the 

2 8 Lawrence, The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, pp. 78-79. 

28 Lawrence, Sons and Lovers (1913)- (New York: Viking, 1958), p. 356. 

80 Ibid., p. 166. 

31 One of the most influential essays on Sons and Lovers is Van Ghent's article, 
which describes Paul as the victim of scheming and possessive women. Dorothy Van 
Ghent, The English Novel: Form and Function (New York, Rinehart and Company, 
'9533. 

32 Lawrence rewrote the book at least twice. The final version, like the precis, was 
done after Frieda had "explained" Freudian theory to Lawrence. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



247 



superb naturalism of its descriptive power, 33 which make it probably still 
the greatest novel of proletarian life in English, but also the vitalist level be- 
neath the Freudian diagram. And at this level Paul is never in any danger 
whatsoever. He is the perfection of self-sustaining ego. The women in the 
book exist in Paul's orbit and to cater to his needs: Clara to awaken him 
sexually, Miriam to worship his talent in the role of disciple and Mrs. Morel 
to provide always that enormous and expansive support, that dynamic motiva- 
tion which can inspire the son of a coal miner to rise above the circum- 
stances of his birth and become a great artist. The curious shift in sympathy 
between the presentation of Mrs. Morel from the early sections of the novel 
where she is a woman tied by poverty to a man she despises, "done out of her 
rights" 34 as a human being, compelled, despite her education and earlier 
aspirations, to accept the tedium of poverty and childbearing in cohabitation 
with a man for whom she no longer feels any sympathy and whose alcoholic 
brutality repells and enslaves her, to the possessive matron guarding her 
beloved son from maturity— is but the shift of Paul's self-centered understand- 
ing. While a boy, Paul hates his father and identifies with his mother; both 
are emotionally crushed and physically afraid before the paternal tyrant. The 
identification is real enough. When Walter Morel locks his pregnant wife 
out of the house in a boozy rage, it is Paul with whom she is pregnant, and 
the scene derives its conviction from the outraged prose of the precious 
burden himself. When Morel beats her and draws blood, it is Paul's snowy 
baby clothes that are stained with the sacrifice. As Mrs. Morel cowers, shelter- 
ing the infant, a bond is sealed that will last past other attachments. 

The book even provides us with glimpses of the Oedipal situation at its 
most erotic: "I've never had a husband— not really . . . His mother gave him 
a long fervent kiss." 35 At this critical juncture Walter Morel walks in, justi- 
fiably annoyed, to mutter "at your mischief again." Thereupon the two rivals 
square off and nearly fight it out. But Walter is beaten anyway, and one 
foresees that Paul is a son who will have much to atone for: "The elderly man 
began to unlace his boots. He stumbled off to bed. His last fight was fought 
in that home." 36 

But the Oedipus complex is rather less a matter of the son's passion for the 
mother than his passion for attaining the level of power to which adult male 

33 The narrative of William's funeral, especially the moment when the coffin is brought 
into the house, the class honesty of the Christmas parties, and the daily life of Mrs. Morel, 
are, in my opinion, the most convincing and poignant prose Lawrence ever wrote. 

34 Lawrence, Sons and Lovers, p. 66. 

35 Ibid., p. 213. "I was born hating my father: as ever I can remember, I shivered 
with honor when he touched me . . . This has been a kind of bond between me and 
my mother. We have loved each other, almost with a husband and wife love . . . We 
knew each other by instinct." From a letter to Rachel Annan J Taylor, Dec. 3, 1910. 
From the Collected Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Ed. by Harry T. Moore (New York, 
Viking, 1962.) Vol. I, pp. 69-70. 

wibid., p. 214. 




248 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



status is supposed to entitle him. Sexual possession of adult woman may fc 
the first, but is hardly the most impressive manifestation of that rank. Mrs 
Morel (in only one short passage of the novel is she ever referred to by her 
own name-Gertrude Coppard) has had no independent existence and is 
utterly deprived of any avenue of achievement. Her method of continuing to 
seek some existence through a vicarious role in the success she urges on her 
sons, is, however regrettable, fairly understandable. The son, because of his 
class and its poverty, has perceived that the means to the power he seeks is 
not in following his father down to the pits, but in following his mother's 
behest and going to school, then to an office, and finally into art. The way 
out of his dilemma lies then in becoming, at first, like his mother rather than 
his father. 

We are frequently told that Lawrence made restitution to his father and 
the men of his father's condition in creating Mellors and others like him 
Such, alas, is not the case. Mellors is as one critic observes, "really a sort of 
gentleman in disguise," 37 and if the portrait of the broken drunkard in Sons 
and Lovers is cruel, and it is undeniably, it is less cruel than converting this 
victim of industrial brutality into a blase sexual superman who is too much of 
a snob to belong to either the working or the middle classes. The late Law- 
rentian hero is clearly Lawrence's own fantasy of the father he might have 
preferred. In the same way, Lady Chatterley is a smartened-up version of his 
mother herself. Like his own wife Frieda von Richthofen, she is a real lady, 
not that disappointed little woman of the mining village with chapped red 
hands who fears her clothes are too shabby to be seen in Lincoln cathedral. 
Yet Mrs. Morel is a brave, even a great woman, though waitresses in tea- 
houses snub her when she can only order custard, too poor to pay for a full 
meal. Sons and Lovers gives us Lawrence's parents without the glamour with 
which his snobbishness later invested them. All the romances of his later 
fiction are a reworking of his parents' marriage, and of his own too, modeled 
on theirs, but a notable advance in social mobility. For Lawrence saw his 
course, saw it with a Calvinistic sense of election, as a vocation to rise and 
surpass his origins. 

When Paul's ambition inspires his escape from identical circumstances it 
will be upon the necks of the women whom he has used, who have constituted 
his steppingstones up into the middle class. For Paul lulls or discards the 
women who have been of use to him. Freud, another Oedipal son, and a 
specialist in such affairs, predicted that "he who is a favorite of the mother 
becomes a 'conqueror.'" 38 Paul is to be just that. By adolescence, he has 
grown pompous enough under the influence of maternal encouragement to 

"Graham Hough, The Dark Sun, A Study of D. H, Lawrence (New York: Capri- 
corn, 1956), p. 31. 

"8 See Alfred Kazin, "Sons, Lovers and Mothers," in the Viking Critical Edition of 
bans and Lovers, edited by Julian Moynahan (New York: Viking, 1968), p. ?99 . 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



249 



proclaim himself full of a "divine discontent" 39 superior to any experience 
Mrs. Morel might understand. And when his mother has ceased to be of 
service, he quietly murders her. When she takes an unseasonably long time 
to die of cancer, he dilutes the milk she has been prescribed to drink: " 'I 
don't want her to eat ... I wish she'd die' . . . And he would put some 
water with it so that it would not nourish her." 40 By a nice irony the son is 
murdering her who gave him life, so that he may have a bit more for himself: 
he who once was fed upon her milk now waters what he gives her to be rid 
of her. Motherhood, of the all-absorbing variety, is a dangerous vocation. 
When his first plan doesn't work, he tries morphine poisoning: "That evening 
he got all the morphia pills there were, and took them downstairs. Carefully, 
he crushed them to powder." 41 This too goes into the milk, and when it 
doesn't take hold at once, he considers stifling her with the bedclothes. 

A young man who takes such liberties must be sustained by a powerful 
faith. Paul is upheld by several — the Nietzschean creed that the artist is be- 
yond morality; another which he shares with his mother that he is an anointed 
child (at his birth she has the dream of Joseph and all the sheaves in the field 
bow to her paragon); and a faith in male supremacy which he has imbibed 
fiom his father and enlarged upon himself. Grown to man's estate, Paul is 
fervid in this piety, but Paul the child is very ambivalent. Despite the ritual 
observances of this cult which Paul witnessed on pay night 42 and in his 
father's feckless irresponsibility toward family obligations, he was as yet too 
young to see much in them beyond the injustices of those who hold rank 
over him as they did over his mother. Seeing that his father's drinking takes 
bread from his young mouth, he identifies with women and children and is 
at first unenthusiastic about masculine prerogative. When a crony comes to 
call for his father, Paul's vision makes us aware of the man's insolence: 
"Jerry entered unasked, and stood by the kitchen doorway . . . stood there 
coolly asserting the rights of men and husbands."' 13 

Lawrence later became convinced that the miner's life and the curse of 
industrialism had reduced this sacred male authority to the oafishness of 
drinking and wife- and child-beating. Young Paul has been on the unpleas- 
ant end of this sort of power, and is acute enough to see that the real control 
lies in the bosses, the moneyed men at the top. Under industrialism, the male 
supremacy he yeams after is, in his eyes, vitiated by poverty and brutality, 
and it grants a noisy power over all too little. This is part of the unfor- 
tunately more ignoble side of Lawrence's lifelong hatred for industrial- 

39 Lawrence, Sons and Lovers, p. 388. 
™Ibid., p. 388, 393- 

41 Ibid., p. 394. 

42 The miners divide their money out of the presence of women, who are thereby 
prevented from interfering on the behalf of household and child-rearing expenses. See 
pages 6, 17, 196, loo. 

43 Lawrence, Sons and Lovers, p. 20. 



250 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



ism. In his middle period he was to concentrate his envy upon the capitalist 
middle classes, and in his last years he championed primitive societies, where 
he was reassured male supremacy was not merely a social phenomenon all 
too often attenuated by class differences, but a religious and total way of life. 

The place of the female in such schemes is fairly clear, but in Lawrence's 
own time it was already becoming a great deal less so. As in The Rainbow, 
this novel's real contrasts are between the older women like his mother, who 
know their place, and the newer breed, like his mistresses, who fail to dis- 
cern it. Mrs. Morel has her traditional vicarious joys: "Now she had two 
sons in the world. She could think of two places, great centers of industry, 
and feel she had put a man into each of them, that these men would work 
out what she wanted; they were derived from her, they were of her, and their 
works would also be hers." 44 When Paul wins a prize for a painting at 
Nottingham castle, she crows "Hurrah, my boy! I knew we should do it!"' 15 
For the rest, she is an eager devotee: "He was going to alter the face of the 
earth in some way which mattered. Wherever he went she felt her soul went 
with him. Whatever he felt her soul stood by him, ready, as it were, to hand 
him his tools." 48 She irons his collars with the rapture of a saint: "It was 
a joy to her to have him proud of his collars. There was no laundry. So she 
used to rub away at them with her little convex iron, to polish them till they 
shone from the sheer pressure of her arm." 47 Miriam's mother, Mrs. Leivers, 
also goes a way toward making a god of the young egoist: "She did him that 
great kindness of treating him almost with reverence."* 8 Lawrence de- 
scribes with aplomb how Miriam idolizes Paul; even stealing a thrush's nest, 
he is so superior that she catches her breath: "He was concentrated on the 
act. Seeing him so, she loved him; he seemed so simple and sufficient to him- 
self. And she could not get to him." 49 Here we are treated not only to 
idealized self-portraiture but to a preview of the later godlike and indifferent 
Lawrentian male. 

Paul is indeed enviable in his rocklike self-sufficiency, basking in the 
reverence of the bevy of women who surround him, all eager to serve and 
stroke— all disposable when their time comes. Meredith's Egoist is comic ex- 
posure; Lawrence's is heroic romance. When Paul first ventures forth into the 
larger male world, it is again the women who prepare the way for his vic- 
tories. In a few days he is a favorite of all the "girls" at Jordan's Surgical 
Appliances. "The girls all liked to hear him talk. They often gathered in a 
litde circle while he sat on a bench and held forth to them, laughing." 00 We 

44 Ibid., p. 101. 
i! > Ibid., p. 153. 
4<s lbid., p. 222. 

47 Ibid., p, 55. QPortnoy's Complaint is a healthy antidote to this sort of thing.) 

48 lipid., p. 223. 
4 ® Ibid., p. 223. 
6u lbid., p. no. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



251 



are told that "they all liked him and he adored them." 01 But as Paul makes 
his way at the factory the adoration is plainly all on their side. They give 
him inordinately expensive oil colors for his birthday and he comes more 
and more to represent the boss, ordering silence, insisting on speed and, al- 
though in the time-honored manner of sexual capitalism, he is sleeping with 
one of his underlings, he insists on a rigid division between sex and 
business. 52 

The novel's center of conflict is said to lie in Paul's divided loyalty to 
mother and mistresses. In Fantasia of the Unconscious, one of two amateur 
essays in psychoanalysis in which Lawrence disputes with Freud, he is very 
explicit about the effect of doting motherhood: 

The son gets on swimmingly , . . He gleefully inherits his adolescence and 
the world at large, mother-supported, mother-loved. Everything comes to him 
in glamour, he feels he sees wondrous much, understands a whole heaven, 
mother-stimulated. Think of the power which a mature woman thus infuses 
into her boy. He flares up like a flame in oxygen. 

"No wonder they say geniuses mostly have great mothers." 53 "They mostly 
have sad fates," he immediately adds with the same sort of self-pity one de- 
tects in the precis. 54 About its negative effects on sons, he is equally explicit, 
for there comes a time when the mother becomes an obstacle: "when faced 
with the actual fact of sex-necessity," the young man meets with his first 
difficulty: 



What is he actually to do with his sensual, sexual self? Bury it? Or make an 
effort with a stranger? For he is taught, even by his mother, that his manhood 
must not forego sex. Yet he is linked up in ideal love already, the best he will 
ever know . . . You will not easily get a man to believe that his carnal love for 
the woman he has made his wife is as high a love as that he felt for his mother 
or sister. 05 

01 Ibid. In Lawrence's day, as in ours, it is customary in business to refer to all low- 
status female employees, e.g., the vast majority of women workers, as "girls," whatever 
their age, and some of Paul's co-workers were twice or thrice his age. The custom bears 
a curious resemblance to that one whereby black men are addressed as "boy" right through 
senility. 

B2 Julian Moynahan, "Sons and Lovers; the Search for Form," in the Viking critical 
edition of Sons and Lovers, p. 569. Like much else in the novel, Paul's phenomenal suc- 
cess with the factory women appears to be an instance of wish fulfillment. Lawrence 
quit a similar factory job "after a few weeks because the factory girls jeered at him and 
one day removed his trousers in a dark corner of the storerooms." 

M D. H. Lawrence, Fantasia of the Unconscious (1922). (New York: Viking, i960), 
p. 159. 

=< Ibid. 

55 Ibid., pp. 1 69-70. 




252 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



What such a skeptic will do instead is outlined fairly succinctly in Freud's 
"The Most Prevalent Form of Degradation in Erotic Life," he will make a 
rigid separation of sex from sensibility, body from soul; he will also develop 
a rationale to help him through this trying schizophrenic experience. The 
Victorians employed the lily-rose dichotomy; Lawrence appeared to have in- 
vented something new in blaming it on his mother. But the lily/rose division 
which Lawrence is so harsh in excoriating in Hardy, 66 is also a prominent 
feature of Sows and Lovers. Miriam is Paul's spiritual mistress, Clara his 
sexual one-the whole arrangement is carefully planned so that neither is 
strong enough to offset his mother's ultimate control. Yet the mother too i s 
finally dispensable, not so that Paul may be free to find a complete relation- 
ship with either young woman, but simply because he wishes to be rid of the 
whole pack of his female supporters so that he may venture forth and inherit 
the great masculine world which awaits him. Therefore the last words of 
the book are directed, not at the self-sorrowing of Paul's "nuit blanche," his 
"dereliction" and "drift towards death," but at the lights of the city', the 
brave new world which awaits the conqueror. 

When Paul wonders incoherently aloud-"I think there's something the 
matter^ with me that I can't ... to give myself to them in marriage, I 
couldn't, . . . something in me shrinks from her like hell"— just as when 
Miriam reproaches him, "It has always been you fighting me off," the reader 
is expected to follow the precis and the critics and understand that this is 
all part of the young man's unfortunate Oedipal plight. Lawrence himself 
attempts to provide a better clue to Paul's type of fixation: 

... the nicest men he knew . . . were so sensitive to their women that they 
would go without them Forever rather than do them a hurt. Being the sons of 
women whose husbands had blundered rather brutally through their feminine 
sanctities, they themselves were too diffident and shy. They could easier deny 
themselves than incur any reproach from a woman; for a woman was like 
their mother, and they were full of the sense of their mother ..." 

Yet ah this well-intentioned puritanism dissolves before the reader's observa- 
tion of the callowness with which Paul treats both Miriam and Clara. The 
first girl is, like Paul himself, a bright youngster resdess within the narrow 
limitations of her class and anxious to escape it through the learning which 
has freed Paul. Less privileged than he, enjoying no support in a home where 
she is bullied by her brothers and taught the most lethal variety of Christian 
resignation by her mother, she retains some rebellious hope despite her far 

«D. H. Lawrence, "A Study of Thomas Hardy," reprinted in Phoenix, the Post- 
humous Papers of D. H. Lawrence (New York: Viking, 1936). 
67 Lawrence, Sons and Lovers, p. 279. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



253 



more discouraging circumstances. Having no one else to turn to, she asks 
Paul, whom she has worshiped as her senior and superior, to help her eke out 
an education. The scenes of his condescension are some of the most remark- 
able instances of sexual sadism disguised as masculine pedagogy which 
literature affords until Ionesco's memorable Lesson. 

Paul has grandly offered to teach her French and mathematics. We are 
told that Miriam's "eyes dilated. She mistrusted him as a teacher." 58 Well she 
might, in view of what follows. Paul is explaining simple equations to her: 

"Do you see?" she looked up at him, her eyes wide with the half-laugh that 
comes of fear. "Don't your 1 " he cried ... It made his blood boil to see her 
there, as it were, at his mercy, her mouth open, her eyes dilated with laughter 
that was afraid, apologetic, ashamed. Then Edgar came along with two buckets 
of milk. 

"Hello!" he said. "What are you doing?" 

"Algebra," replied Paul, 

"Algebra!" repeated Edgar curiously. Then he passed on with a laugh. 59 

Paul is roused by the mixture of tears and beauty; Miriam is beautiful to him 
when she suffers and cringes: "She was ruddy and beautiful. Yet her soul 
seemed to be intensely supplicating. The algebra-book she closed, shrinking, 
knowing he was angered." 60 

As she is self-conscious and without confidence (Miriam's sense of inferior- 
ity is the key to her character), she cannot leam well: 'Things came slowly 
to her. And she held herself in a grip, seemed so utterly humble before the 
lesson, it made his blood rouse." D1 Blood roused is, of course, the Lawrentian 
formula for sexual excitement and an erection; the algebra lesson is some- 
thing of a symbol for the couple's entire relationship. The sight of Miriam 
suffering or humiliated (she later gives Paul her virginity in a delirium of 
both emotions) is the very essence of her attractiveness to him, but his re- 
sponse is never without an element of hostility and sadism. His reaction here 
is typical: "In spite of himself, his blood began to boil with her. It was 
strange that no one else made him in such a fury. He flared against her. 
Once he threw the pencil in her face. There was a silence. She turned her 
face slightly aside." 62 Of course, Miriam is not angry, for one does not get 
angry at God. "When he saw her eager, silent, as it were, blind face, he felt 
he wanted to throw the pencil in it . . , and because of the intensity with 
which she roused him, he sought her." 63 The reader is made uncomfortably 
aware that "pencil" is etymologically, and perhaps even in the author's con- 



<S8 Ibid., p. 
M Ibid., p. 

e° Ibid. 
61 Ibid, 
wibid., p. 
Mlbid. 



155. 

156. 



157- 




254 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



scious mind as well, related to "penis" and both are instruments which have 
here become equated with literacy and punishment. 

Miriam's aspirations are not respected; her failures are understood to be 
due to inferiority of talent. There are also a great many explanations pro- 
vided the reader that she is frigid, and everything in her situation would seem 
to confirm this. Her mother's literal Victorian repugnance toward sexuality 
is the most plausible explanation, even without our knowledge of Miriam's 
debilitating insecurity. When she thinks of giving herself to Paul, she fore- 
sees beforehand that "he would be disappointed, he would find no satisfac- 
tion, and then he would go away," The chapter where Paul finally brings her 
to bed is entitled, "The Test on Miriam." Needless to say, she does not meas- 
ure up, cannot pass his demanding examination. So her prediction comes true 
and Paul throws her away and takes up Clara. Yet the situation is somehow 
not this simple; even within the muddled explanations of Lawrence's text, it is 
several times made clear that Paul withholds himself quite as much as does 
Miriam. 04 Her famous frigidity appears to be his excuse. In the classic di- 
lemma of the lily/rose choice Paul has been provided with an alibi which 
passes responsibility on to his mother. 

While the first half of Sons and Lovers is perfectly realized, the second 
part is deeply flawed by Lawrence's overparticipation in Paul's endless schem- 
ing to disentangle himself from the persons who have helped him most. 
Lawrence is so ambivalent here that he is far from being clear, or perhaps 
even honest, and he offers us two contrary reasons for Paul's rejection of 
Miriam. One is that she will "put him in her pocket." And the other, totally 
contradictory, is the puzzling excuse that in their last interview, she failed him 
by not seizing upon him and claiming him as her mate and property. 

It would seem that for reasons of his own, Lawrence has chosen to confuse 
the sensitive and intelligent young woman who was Jessie Chambers 65 with 
the tired old lily of another age's literary convention. The same discrepancy 
is noticeable in his portrait of Clara, 60 who is really two people, the rebellious 
feminist and political activist whom Paul accuses of penis envy and 
even man-hating, and who tempts him the more for being a harder conquest, 
and, at a later stage, the sensuous rose, who by the end of the novel is changed 
once again— now beyond recognition— into a "loose woman" whom Paul non- 
chalantly disposes of when he has exhausted her sexual utility. Returning her 
to her husband, Paul even finds it convenient to enter into one of Lawrence's 
Blutbruderschaft bonds with Baxter Dawes, arranging an assignation in the 
country where Clara, meek as a sheep, is delivered over to the man she hated 

« Ibid., p. 284. 

65 See Jessie Chambers, D. H. Lawrence, A Personal Record, by "E.T." 2nd revised 
edition (New York: Barnes and Noble, 1965). 

06 Actually, Clara is nobody at all. Tradition has it that Lawrence's iniriatiix was a 
Mrs. Dax who simply took pity on the lad: "She took him upstairs one afternoon because 
she thought he needed it." Julian Moynahan, op. cit., p. 569. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



=•55 



and left years before. The text makes it clear that Dawes had beat and de- 
ceived his wife. Yet, with a consummate emotional manipulation, Paul man- 
ages to impose his own version of her marriage on Clara, finally bringing 
her to say that its failure was her fault. Paul, formerly her pupil in sexuality, 
n ow imagines he has relieved Clara of what he smugly describes as the 
"fernme incomprise" quality which had driven her to the errors of feminism. 
We are given to understand that through the sexual instruction of this novice, 
Clara was granted feminine "fulfillment." Paul is now pleased to make a 
gift of Clara to her former owner fancying, that as the latter has de- 
generated through illness and poverty (Paul has had Dawes fired) he ought 
to be glad of salvaging such a brotherly castoff. 

Even before it provides Paul with sexual gratification, the affair offers 
considerable opportunities for the pleasure of bullying: 

"Here, I say, you seem to forget I'm your boss. It just occurs to me." 

"And what does that mean?" she asked coolly. 

"It means I've got a right to boss you." 

"Is there anything you want to complain about?" 

"Oh, I say, you needn't be nasty," he said angrily. 

"I don't know what you want," she said, continuing her task. 

"I want you to treat me nicely and respectfully." 

"Call you 'sir,' perhaps?" she asked quietly. 

"Yes, call me 'sir.' I should love it." 07 

The sexual therapy Clara affords to Paul is meant to be a balm to his viru- 
lent Oedipal syndrome, but is even more obviously a salve to his ego. Only in 
the fleeting moments of the orgasm can the egoist escape his egotism, but 
Lawrence's account fails to confirm this: 

She knew how stark and alone he was, and she felt it was great that he came to 
her, and she took him simply because his need was bigger than either her or 
him, and her soul was still within her. She did this for him in his need, even if 
he left her, for she loved him. 98 

This is a dazzling example of how men think women ought to think, but the 
book is full of them. By relieving his "needs" with a woman he rigidly con- 
fines to a "stranger in the dark" category, Paul has touched the great Law- 
rentian sexual mystery and discovered "the cry of the peewit" and the "wheel 
of the stars." 09 

Having achieved this transcendence through Clara's offices, he finds it con- 
venient to dismiss her. While watching her swim far out at sea during a 
holiday they have taken together, Paul converts himself into a species of god 

67 Lawrence, Sons and Lovers, p. 266. 
Si lbid., p. 353. 
e» Jbid. 



256 SEXUAL POLITICS 

in the universe before whom Clara dwindles to the proportions of micro- 
scopic life: 

"Look how little she is!" he said to himself. "She's lost like a grain of sand in the 
beach— just a concentrated speck blown along, a tiny white foam-bubble, almost 
nothing among the morning . . . She represents something, like a bubble of 
foam represents the sea. But what is she. It's not her I care for." 70 

This is an impressive demonstration of how subject diminishes object and 
having, through his sexual magnetism, reduced this once formidable, inde- 
pendent woman to the level of quivering passion, Paul cannot help but find 
her a nuisance. What if their affair were discovered at work? We are told 
that "She invariably waited for him at dinner-time for him to embrace her 
before she went." 71 Paul reacts to such attentions like the bumptious young 
clerk he has become: 

"Surely there's a time for everything. ... I don't want anything to do with 
love when I'm at work. Work's work—" 

"And what is lover 1 " she asked. "Has it to have special hours?" 
"Yes, out of work hours." . . . 
"Is it only to exist in spare time?" 
"That's all, and not always then." 72 

It is Paul's habit to lecture his mistresses that, as women, they are incapable 
of the sort of wholehearted attention to task or achievement that is the 
province of the male and the cause of his superiority. 

"I suppose work can be everything to a man , . . But a woman only works 
with a part of herself. The real and vital part is covered up." 73 

The idea seems to be that the female's lower nature, here gently phrased 
as her "true nature," is incapable of objective activity and finds its only 
satisfactions in human relationship where she may be of service to men and 
to children. Men in later Lawrence novels, men such as Aaron, constandy 
ridicule trivial female efforts at art or ideas. 

Given such views, it is not very surprising that Paul should make such 
excellent use of women, Clara included, and when they have outlived their 
usefulness to him, discard them. As Clara is a creature of the double standard 
of morality, the woman as rose or sensuality, he invokes the double standard 
to get rid of her, declaring sententiously that "after all, she was a married 

™ihid., pp. 357-58. 

71 Ibid., p. 355. 

« Ibid. 

73 Ibid., p. 416. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



257 



woman, and she had no right even to what he gave her." 71 He finally be- 
takes himself to a fustian view of the indissolubility of marriage, decrees 
that she is completely Dawes's property, and with a sense of righteousness, 
returns her, no worse, indeed much the better, for wear. 

Having rid himself of the two young women, time-consuming sex objects, 
who may have posed some other threat as well, possibly one of intellectual 
competition, Paul is free to make moan over his mother's corpse, give Miriam 
a final brushoff, and turn his face to the city. The elaborate descriptions of 
his suicidal state, however much they may spring from a deep, though much 
earlier, sorrow over the loss of his mother, appear rather tacked on in the 
book itself, as do certain of the Freudian explanations of his coldness as 
being due to his mother's baneful influence. Paul is actually in brilliant con- 
dition when the novel ends, having extracted every conceivable service from 
his women, now neatly disposed of, so that he may go on to grander ad- 
ventures. Even here, the force of his mother, the endless spring of Lawrence's 
sacred font, will support him: "She was the only thing that held him up, 
himself amid all this. And she was gone, intermingled herself." 75 But Paul 
has managed to devour all of mother that he needs; the meal will last a 
lifetime. And the great adventure of his success will henceforward be his 
own. "Turning sharply, he walked toward the city's gold phosphorescence. 
His fists were shut, his mouth set fast." 76 Paul may now dismiss his 
mother's shade with confidence; all she had to offer is with him still. 

Ill Transitional 

The Rainbow and Women in Love mark a transition in Lawrence's sexual 
affinity from mother to mistress, a shift that, when accomplished, finally pro- 
duces powerful feelings of hostility and a negative attitude toward women 
of his own generation, who come more and more to threaten him. Lawrence's 
peculiar solution seems to marry and smother them (curiously related gestures 
here) and then to fare "beyond women" to homosexual attachments, forming 
sexual-political alliances with other males. 

The Rainbow is the first of Lawrence's important fictions. The most beau- 
tiful and lyric of his novels, it is somehow also the most atypical. The novel 
is not only a new departure from the naturalism of Sons and Lovers into an 
original species of psychic narrative which is Lawrence's major technical 
achievement; it also contains the key to his later sexual attitudes; here is the 
explanation, and perhaps even the root of his final absorption in "phallic con- 
sciousness" and his conversion to a doctrinaire male-supremacist ethic. A clas- 
sic in its genre, the book is the story of three generations. It celebrates the 
pastoral life in terms of fertility— never the phallic fertility of the later period, 
but the power of the womb. Every event, whether it be falling in love or 

74 Ibid., p. 352. 

75 Ibid., p. 420. 
™ Ibid. 




2, 5 8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



attaining maturity, is described in terms of fertility, gestation, parturition, and 
birth. In The Rainbow, women appear to give birth by parthenogenesis. 
The power of the womb seems to loom in Lawrence's consciousness, as so 
overwhelming a force, so really terrifying in its self-sufficiency, that it is not 
hard to see how he found it necessary to reject it in his later novels where 
there is a complete volte face and the male alone is the life force. The idea 
of "womb envy" might strike one as pure invention, Karen Homey' s malicious 
answer to Freud's doctrine of penis envy. But in Lawrence, we seem to have 
hit upon an authentic case of this disorder. Accordingly, the early sections 
of The Rainbow show a curious absorption in the myth of the eternal femi- 
nine, the earth mother, and constitute a veritable hymn to the feminine 
mystique. 

The heroines of the first two sections of the book, Lydia and Anna Brang- 
wen, mother and daughter, appear to be grand and towering matriarchs. The 
heroine of the third section, Ursula Btangwen is not, like her predecessors, 
rooted in the past and the traditional life of the farm wife and mother, but 
is instead Lawrence's own contemporary, probably of his own age and genera- 
tion. He has no trouble portraying the traditional women, Lydia and Anna, 
and is willing to concede them enormous power. Like one of Ruskin's 
"Queens," the wife of the past was the arbiter of ethical norms: "The man 
placed in her hands their own conscience, they said to her, 'Be my conscience- 
keeper, be the angel at the doorway guarding my outgoing and my in- 
coming.' And the woman fulfilled her trust." 77 In these period portraits the 
women are, in Lawrence's opinion, "dominant," a state of affairs he 
acquiesces in and even seems to approve; Lydia conquers Tom Brangwen 
with her inscrutable distant inattention, Anna spoils Will Brangwen's life 
and her own by becoming a breeder extraordinaire, tying him to the burden 
of nine children until both his hope and his talent have withered. Yet Law- 
rence seems to applaud because these earlier persons still lived in a simple 
primitive "blood knowledge" which contrasts very favorably to the present; 
the three generations are a devolution from the golden age to the leaden 
industrial morass of today. 

Oddly enough, neither of these two Victorian or late Victorian women are 
in any way sexually inhibited. Lydia instructs her husband in the art of love, 
and both Anna and Lydia initiate sexual activity on their own terms and 
timing— a thing the later Lawrence deplored. In The Rainbow, the sexuality 
of the past is idealized into a healthy freedom it quite certainly was not, 
while women are given an altogether superior authority they did not possess 
and it were better they did not exercise in any case. 

So entirely does the womb dominate the book that it becomes a symbol, 
in the arch of Lincoln cathedral, or in the moon, of the spiritual and the 
supernatural. The womb is so portentous and enviable an organ that the men 

77 D. H. Lawrence, The Rainbow (1915). (New York: Viking, 1967]), p. 13. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



259 



jn the book make some effort to participate in the marvel. When Ursula 
offends Anton Skrebensky, the reader is informed that the youth felt a "dead 
weight in his womb." 78 When Lydia gives birth, her husband endures 
the agony of the couvade. During her delivery, Tom is "with his wife in 
labor, the child was being brought forth out of their one flesh ... the rent 
was not in his body, but it was of his body ... the quiver ran through to 
him." 79 So entirely do women predominate in the book that all Oedipal 
relationships of parent and child are a series of father-daughter romances. 
All masculine attempts to play lord and master and fall back upon patriarchal 
prerogative, the very stuff of Lawrence's later work, are subjected to ridicule 
in The Rainbow. Lawrence says it is "shameful and petty" of Will Brangwen 
to try to recapture "the old position of master of the house." Anna simply 
calls him a fool. Will himself knows better, is made aware of "what a fool 
he was," and is "flayed by the knowledge." Lawrence is still capable of separat- 
ing masculine authority from masculinity, and makes Will himself recognize 
that his father-in-law "had been a man without arrogating any author- 
ity." 80 Patriarchal prejudices are overturned again when young Ursula takes 
a look at the iconography of religious art and finds the concept of God 
the Father a nauseating presumption: "The figure of the Most High bored 
her and roused her resentment. Was this the culmination and the meaning 
of it all, this draped null figure . . . such a banality for God." 81 

In The Rainbow, Lawrence dealt with the new woman head on in the 
character of Ursula. Ursula Brangwen is to fulfill the ambitions of her ances- 
tors—for from the first Brangwens, the men had looked back to the fields, 
the fertile earth, and the women looked out toward learning and the cities. 
Ursula's mother Anna had been "straining her eyes to something beyond" 
and "from her Pisgah mount" she could glimpse "a faint gleaming horizon, 
a long way off,'' 32 a promised land she never arrived in, falling into a mind- 
less slattern instead. But Ursula does reach the promised land of the Brang- 
wen women; transcending their confining traditional world she goes out to 
work and then to the university. 

For all his overawed reverence before mother figures—in fact because of 
it— Lawrence finds the new woman in Ursula fairly hard to bear. It is only 
when he gets to Ursula that Lawrence begins to lose rapport with his char- 
acters and distort the glowing sympathy which so distinguishes the first half 
of the novel. Ursula is too close to him; she is a rival. Finally, one understands 
she is a threat and the author's ambivalence toward her is a fascinated com- 
bination of sympathy and dislike— even fear. There is a lavish, almost infan- 
tile, desire on Lawrence's part to forgo everything before the matriarchal 

78 Ibid., p. 325. 
7 » Ibid., p. 70. 
so lbid., p, 170. 

81 Ibid., p. 277. 

82 Ibid., p. 1 92. 




26o 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



figures of the past. He appears overpowered by their fecundity, serenity, their 
magical correspondence with the earth and the moon. But when a creature 
equipped with all this redoubtable mana enters into what he prefers here to 
imagine is the male's own lesser sphere of intellect and social action, he seems 
caught in a rush of terror. If Ursula has all the same mysterious powers of the 
female which gave Lydia and Anna such stature, the control of life and the 
ability to give birth which he finds so impressive, as well as the capacity to 
live in "the man's world" (as Lawrence calls the chapter in which she earns 
her living) to succeed and achieve in it, then, Lawrence seems to feel, there 
is very little left anywhere for the male. He is bettered in his own field and 
beaten in hers. Most of Lawrence's sexual politics appears to spring from 
this version of the emancipation of women; many of the preoccupations of 
his later work are a response to it. 

It is important to know that he began in the midst of the feminist move- 
ment, and that he began on the defensive. There is a current of bitter ani- 
mosity which runs throughout Lawrence's description of Ursula's invasion of 
the "mysteriously man's world," the "world of daily work and duty and 
existence as a working member of the community" for, really, he keeps re- 
minding the reader, it is neither natural nor necessary that she so transgress, 
After all, she is, in the vulgar expression, sitting on a fortune and is never 
without the "price of her ransom— her femaleness." There is a cynical envy 
in Lawrence's attitude that this is unfair competition— "what she could not 
get because she was a human being, fellow to the rest of mankind, she would 
get because she was a female." 83 As she can always sell herself, earning her 
own living is merely an indulgence, an indulgence made at his expense. 
Lawrence had made the same difficult climb through the horrors of slum 
school teaching to the university, and his narrative of Ursula's suffering along 
the way is an odd mixture of sympathy— when he lapses into autobiography 
and identification with the character— mingled with acrid resentment, at the 
thought of one of her sex achieving this much. The splendid maternal old 
women posed no threat, no competition or rivalry. Ursula as the new woman 
clearly does. When she rebels at staying on as an upper servant to her parents 
and fights for a life of her own, Lawrence is torn between trying to respect 
her position and siding with her elders. He goes to every length to make the 
lot of the independent woman repellent: Ursula's painful struggle is almost 
an object lesson. Finally he sides with the opposition: "Let her find out what 
it's like. She'll soon have enough." 8 * 

Arrived at her teaching post, a penitentiary which deserves to rank with 
any of the children's hells which Dickens portrays, Ursula is immediately 
made aware that working women are sad figures, somewhat like charladies. 
Even worse, they cease to be attractive to men, who hold their sex as a point 

S3 Ibid., p. 333 . 
Si lbid., p. 359. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



261 



against them. Oddly enough, they are by nature, as it were, unfitted even for 
schoolteaching. Lawrence's own theory of education is in general agreement 
with that of Mr. Harby, Ursula's principal, a martinet who stultifies his 
pupils while ruling them through sheer will power, brutalizing them so in 
the process that they exhibit the same fine contempt as he for teachers who 
employ any more gentle or humane method of instruction. 

We are told that much of Harby's nastiness derives from doing work be- 
neath him, mere woman's work, yet we are also assured that the imposition 
of will which Lawrence assures us is necessary to run classes is above a mere 
woman's ability. It is demonstrated over and over, that should Ursula succeed, 
she will lose her "femininity," as did poor Violet Harby, a cadaverous spin- 
ster, or destroy the finer part of herself, as she does when she strikes a pupil. 
Men, it seems, are crude enough to survive and sustain no such damage. 
Lawrence can only sympathize provisionally, stipulating that the moment 
Ursula "proves herself (he will allow her to survive but not to succeed), 
she must consent to withdraw from his territory on the instant she has satis- 
fied her perverse little desire to try the water. 

The driving force behind Ursula's efforts, is, of course, the feminist move- 
ment, at its height during the years of The Rainbow, and a great force in 
Lawrence's time, one which he was compelled to deal with. His method here 
is half derogatory, half vaporous: 

For her, as for Maggie, the liberty of women, meant something real and deep. 
She felt that somewhere, in something, she was not free. And she wanted to be. 
She was in revolt. For once she was free she could get somewhere. Ah, the 
wonderful real somewhere . . . that she felt deep deep inside her. In coming 
out and earning her own living she had made a strong, cruel move towards 
freeing herself. But having more freedom, she only became more profoundly 
aware of the big want . . . there remained always the want she could put no 
name to. 85 

Attentive readers will of course know that the big want is a husband, pro- 
vided in the sequel in the form of Birkin, who is no less a personage than 
Lawrence himself. But lest we fail to apprehend, we are instructed that 
"Her fundamental organic knowledge had as yet to take form and rise in 
utterance," which means that Ursula is unfulfilled femininity. To make mat- 
ters worse, she had enjoyed a brief homosexual affair with a fellow spirit, 
Winifred Inger, which illustrates even more clearly the dangers of feminism. 
Lawrence has recourse here to adjectives such as "corruption" and entitles 
the chapter where it occurs as "Shame." 80 Ursula earns her freedom and 

8B Ibid., pp. 406-7. 

86 H?id., p. 412. To make his contempt perfectly clear, Lawrence marries Winifred off 
to art industrialist, declaring that both are mere idolators of machinery; the match is so 
unlikely it can serve only as punishment. Another feminist friend is left teaching school 
"in a heavy brooding sadness." 



2.62 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



goes on to the university, but Lawrence ridicules her ambitions: "she would 
take her degree, and she would-ah, she would perhaps be a big woman and 
lead a movement." 87 Big women are dangerous items unless they be the ma- 
ternal figures of the past, and so the fate reserved for Ursula is a very differ- 
ent one— Lawrence causes her to fail her examinations, go down in defeat 
without her coveted B.A. and end her life a contented housewife. 

She has one last task, however, and that is to "murder" (jilt, actually, but 
Lawrence always speaks of the event in terms of homicide to manly pride) 
Anton Skrebensky, her first lover, whom Lawrence is anxious to execute on 
several grounds: a class enemy— an aristocrat, colonialist, and snob, Anton 
is suspect on even more hateful grounds for his robotlike conventionality 
and even for his blundering faith in democracy and progress, two ideas Law- 
rence particularly despises. And furthermore, Anton must be sacrificed as an 
object lesson in how monstrous the new woman can be. Ursula furnishes 
graphic proof of this first in treating Anton as an instrument or sex object 
rather in the manner in which men are accustomed to treat women, then in 
refusing to be his marital appendage, and finally, in "castrating" him by a 
series of extremely tenuous and hazy bouts of magic. Her vehicle of destruc- 
tion is moonlight, for Lawrence is addicted to the notion of the moon as a fe- 
male symbol, once beneficent, but lately malefic and a considerable public 
danger. Having polished off the unfortunate young man, Ursula beholds the 
vision of the rainbow and the promise of a new world, for the old is drowned 
in the flood. She alone survives, the new woman awaiting the new man. 
Ursula has lived in erotic expectation of a mating between the "Sons of God 
and the daughters of men." 88 Anton was no son of God, only an empty shell 
in the midst of the deluge. 

Women in Love presents us with the new man arrived in time to give 
Ursula her comeuppance and demote her back to wifely subjection. It is im- 
portant to understand how pressing a mission Lawrence conceived this to be, 
for he came himself upon the errand. The novel, as stated in the preface, 
is autobiographical; 86 its hero, Rupert Birkin, is Lawrence himself. Much of 
the description of Birkin is rendered through the eyes of Ursula who is in 
love with him, so that expressions of admiration abound: his brows have a 
"curious hidden richness . . . rich fine exquisite curves, the powerful beauty 
of life itself, a sense of richness and liberty," 80 we are also asked to see in him 
"the rare quality of an utterly desirable man" 81 which is rather a lot to say of 
oneself. Birkin is a prophet, the Son of God at last. 

87 Ibid., p. 407. 

88 Ibid., p. 493 and elsewhere. 

89 "The novel pretends only to be a record of the writer's own desires, aspirations, 
struggles, in a word, a record of the profoundest experiences in the self," Lawrence, 
Women in Love (1920). (New York: Viking, i960), Preface, p. viii. 

»"Iijii., p. 37. 
61 Ibid., p. 122. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



263 



Women in Love is the first of Lawrence's books addressed directly to sexual 
politics. It resumes the campaign against the modern woman, represented 
here by Hermione and Gudrun. Ursula shall be saved by becoming Birkin's 
wife and echo. The other two women are not only damned but the enemy. 
The portrait of Hermione is probably the most savage personal attack Law- 
rence ever wrote. She is the new woman as intellectual, a creature to whom 
both Birkin and the narrator react with almost hysterical hatred, bombarding 
her with this sort of description: "macabre, something repulsive," "a ter- 
rible void, a lack, a deficiency of being within." 92 

Ursula is to join Birkin, and the two will be the new couple which accord- 
ing to the official pronouncements and rules which Birkin lays clown shall be 
a perfect equilibrium between polarities, "a pure balance of two single be- 
ings:— as the stars balance each other." 03 This type of surface assertion is 
betrayed over and over by the obvious contradictions between preachment 
and practice. One of the book's most dynamic scenes is Gerald Critch's 
abuse of a fine Arab mare whom he forces to a railroad crossing, asserting his 
will in a fashion he fancies is masculine and Birkin finds agreeable, cutting 
the animal badly in the process. The incident takes on symbolic force as 
Birkin sermonizes on it, comparing the mare mastered to the woman mas- 
tered: "It's the last, perhaps highest love-impulse to resign your will to the 
higher being . . . And woman is the same as horses: two wills act in opposi- 
tion inside her. With one will, she wants to subject herself utterly. With 
the other she wants to bolt, and pitch her rider to perdition." 94 Gerald is an 
unimaginative fellow who tries to control women with the tired old nostrums 
of money and physical force. Birkin is a far more sophisticated type who em- 
ploys psychological warfare. 

On the day when Ursula comes to take tea with him and he proposes an 
alliance with her on the stellar plan, his trump card, and the symbolic ex- 
planation of his intentions, turns out to be the object lesson put forward by 
his cat. Having begun by informing Ursula he will not love her, as he is 
interested in going beyond love to "something much more impersonal and 
harder," 05 he goes on to state his terms: "I've seen plenty of women, I'm sick 
of seeing them. I want a woman I don't see 98 ... I don't want your good 
looks, and I don't want your womanly feelings, and I don't want your 

m Ibid., pp. 10-11. The model of this caricature is Lady Ottoline Morrell, a good 
friend and Lawrence's mistress for a time. There is a merciless quality in his picture of 
the affair; the lady is made to grovel at his feet. Although there is certainly an element 
of class revenge here, the final motivation for the waspishness with which the portrait 
is done remains always elusive. Lawrence corresponded with Lady Ottoline while writing 
the book to tell her how well it was going and how good it was. 

9A lbUL, p. 139. 

ei Ibid., pp. 132-33. 

66 Ibid., p. 136. 

66 Ibid., p. r38. 



^SmKr 



264 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



thoughts nor opinions nor your ideas." 97 The "new" relationship, while pos- 
ing as an affirmation of the primal unconscious sexual being, to adopt Law- 
rence's jargon, is in effect a denial of personality in the woman. Birkin is full 
of opinions and ideas and holds forth all through the book while Ursula 
puts docile leading questions to him. Though she requires some effort to tame 
she comes to follow him in apostolic faith. The separate spheres live on in a 
smart new verbiage, but the rea! "terms of the contract," a far harsher mat- 
ter, are supplied by Mino the cat, in his exercise of authority over his inferior 
mate: 

He, going stately on his slim legs, walked after her, then suddenly, for pure 
excess, he gave her a light cuff with his paw on the side of her face. She ran off 
a few steps, like a blown leaf along the ground, then crouched unobtrusively 
in submissive, wild patience. The Mino pretended to take no notice of her. He 
blinked his eyes superbly at the landscape. In a moment she drew herself to- 
gether and moved softly, a fleecy brown-grey shadow, a few paces forward. 
She began to quicken her pace, in a moment she would be gone like a dream 
when the young grey lord sprang before her and gave her a light handsome cuff. 
She subsisted at once submissively ... In a lovely springing leap, like a wind, 
the Mino was upon her, and had boxed her twice, very definitely, with a white, 
delicate fist. She sank and slid back, unquestioningly. He walked after her and 
cuffed her once or twice leisurely." 8 

Ursula draws the parallel, in case we missed it: "It's just like Gerald Critch 
with his horse-a lust for bullying-a real Wille zur Macht." 08 Birkin defends 
such conduct and brings home the moral: "With the Mino it is a desire to 
bring this female cat into pure stable equilibrium , . . It's the old Adam . . . 
Adam kept Eve in the indestructible paradise when he kept her single with 
himself, like a star in its orbit." 100 And of course a star in Birkin's orbit is 
exactly what Ursula's position is to be; Birkin will play at the Son of God, 
Ursula revolving quietly at his side. 

According to a formula which Lawrence was to favor increasingly, Ursula 
is presented as an incomplete creature, half-asleep in the tedium of her spin- 
ster schoolmistress life. Birkin will awake her according to a Lawrentian 
convention whereby the male gives birth to the female. What is particularly 
surprising about all this is how very much Lawrentian marriage resembles a 
plunge into another sleep, even a death. Ursula resigns her position, allowing 
Birkin to dictate her letter of resignation. We are told over and over that the 
marriage is to bring her a new life, yet nothing materializes, and she becomes 
more and more her husband's creature, accepting his instruction even in her 
own field of botany, which he entered at their first meeting by taking over 

»Ubid., p. 139. 

98 ibid., p. 140. 

99 Ibid., p. 142, 

100 Ibid. 



D, H. LAWRENCE 



¦2.6s 



her classroom, and goes on to master so that he may correct her on the 
species of a daisy. Lawrence tells us Ursula "was not herself— she was not 
anything. She was something that is going to be soon-soon -very soon ... It 
was all like a sleep." 101 What she does "become" is only a nonentity, utterly 
incorporated into Birkin, his single follower, proselytizing and sloganeering 
"if only the world were he! If only he could call a world into being." 102 

Sexually, she comes to be the epitome of passivity: "she wanted to submit, 
she wanted to know. What would he do to her? . . . She could not be herself 
, , . she abandoned herself to him." 103 Hereafter, marriage represents not 
only the taming of the woman, but her extinction. 

In Lawrence's short story, "The Fox," this process of anaesthetizing the 
bride is even more clearly outlined. Henry, the masculine spirit and fox of 
the title, eliminates his lesbian competition, Jill Banford, murdering her with 
will power, materially assisted by a tree he fells on her head. He then sits 
down to await the rigor mortis effect he intends to have on his bride, whose 
drugged loss of self shall give him that total control over her he requires so 
that he may transcend her into the male world of achievement. 

No, he wouldn't let her exert her love toward him. No, she had to be passive, to 
acquiesce, and to be submerged under the surface of love. She had to be like 
the seaweeds she saw as she peered down from the boat, swaying forever 
delicately under-water . , , never, never rising and looking forth above the 
water while they lived. Never. Never looking forth above the water while they 
lived. Never looking forth above the water until they died, only then washing, 
corpses, upon the surface ... it was always under-water, always under-water. 
And she, being a woman, must be like that. . . . He did not want her to watch 
any more, to see any more, to understand any more. He wanted to veil her 
woman's spirit, as Orientals veil the woman's face. He wanted her to commit 
herself to him, and to put her independent spirit to sleep . . . He wanted to 
make her submit, yield, blindly pass away out of all her strenuous consciousness. 
He wanted to take away her consciousness, and make her just his woman. Just 
his woman. . . . And then he would have her, and he would have his own life 
at last . . . Then he would have all his own life as a young man and a male. 104 

Women in Love is commonly accepted as the book of Birkin-Lawrence's 
marriage, but it is actually the story of Birkin's unrequited love for Gerald, 
the real erotic center in the novel. Ursula (or Frieda) is worn past interest 
by now— hence the need for another couple, Gerald and Gudrun, to liven 
things up. 105 The plot is triangular. And since triangles are actually diagrams 

1( >l Ibid., pp. 377-78. 

102 Ibid., p. 382. 

103 Ibid., pp. 402 and 426. 

lw D. H. Lawrence, "The Fox" 09 2 3)> Four Short Novels of D. H. Lawrence 
(New York: Viking, 1965), pp. 175-76, 178, and 179. 

los Gudrun and Gerald are Katherine Mansfield and John Middleton Murry. Murry's 
letters to Frieda after Lawrence's death shed some light on the friendship: it appears 



266 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



of power in sexual politics, it might be worthwhile to recall what classic 
triangle situations involved before we embark on the innovation which Law- 
rence introduced, The courdy triangle featured a lady at its apex, the prize 
between two rivals, her husband and legal owner, her lover and true pos- 
sessor. Despite the dangers she endured from the former, she was still given 
the choice of accepting the latter. The Continental triangle, which is the 
staple of French and Italian bourgeois literature, has a male at its apex, who 
represents the ego or center of interest in such fiction as the wife or lady 
never did. 106 At the bases, vying for his favors, are wife and mistress. His 
position is one of very considerable power, both social and economic, and is 
the perfect expression of the double standard. 

Lawrence invented a new triangular situation, again with ego, or the mas- 
culine consciousness, generally Lawrence himself, at the center or apex. At 
one corner stands the woman, hereafter generally the wife, soliciting his 
rather patronizing attention; at the other is a male whom ego courts. This 
triangle affords even greater power leverage than earlier ones, for the ego at 
the apex has the choice not of two women, but of a man or a woman, the 
former often a glamorous or important public personage. The female who is 
granted ego's favors must now struggle with a male for what is left of the 
hero's time and interest. There is a strong new double standard built into 
this, for the wife is allowed no other distractions, either hetero- or homosexual, 
while the male ego is permitted to enjoy himself in both these directions. 
While deploring marital infidelity, Lawrence did not consider love between 
males adulterous. 

The old rivalry of wife and mistress might have been transformed under 
feminist pressures into an entente, and Lawrence has a bitter dread of fe- 
male alliances of any land. The most feasible explanation of his hatred for 
female homosexuality or even friendship seems to be political distrust. Again 
this is a double standard, for male homosexuality and friendship are one of 
the great interests of Lawrence's life. Females are pitted against each other, 
but outside the triangle, where their energies are spent in fighting each other 
over the hero, Hermione, Birkin's former mistress, and Ursula, his new one, 
are prevented from forming any dangerous female alliance by what Lawrence 
rather hopefully assures us is the natural repugnance of women toward each 
other. 

Males, however, are encouraged to build alliances, and Lawrence's intro- 
duction seems to direct itself at this: "Every man who is acutely alive must 

Murcy was in love with Frieda, Lawrence with Murry, and D. H, possibly willing to 
"make a deal" as it were with his wife's lover, so that he might enjoy Murry too. See 
Frieda Lawrence, The Memoirs and Correspondence, edited by E. W. Tedlock (New 
York: Knopf, 1964), pp. 340, 360. 

108 The center of consciousness, when there was one, as in the lyric, was neatly always 
the lover. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



267 



wresde with his own soul . . . Men must speak to one another." 107 As an aid 
to such communication Lawrence relied upon the cult of Blutbruderschaft. 
Throughout the book, Birkin courts Gerald, the ineffably beautiful white 
male of the master class, the epitome of all Birkin and Lawrence are said to 
hate— the industrialist, the mine owner. Gerald declines the proposition con- 
sistently and resists all overtures. This rejection is conveyed to the reader as 
the death wish, an icy inability to love. Appropriately, Gerald is frozen to 
death in the Alps and the book is given a Spenglerian ideological superstruc- 
ture to justify this rather spiteful revenge. Gudrun is made the villain of the 
piece and Gerald's death is blamed on her, despite Lawrence's equally strong 
desire to have Gerald execute her as the hateful New Woman and his rival 
for the love of the blond beast. The fair master-class type of manhood is by 
no means repellent to Lawrence; it is even highly seductive, and some of his 
denunciation of it appears to stem really from the rancor of unrequited 
love. One line rings out in the whole book— Birkin's frantic cry at Gerald's 
coffin, after a chilly necrophiliac scene with the frozen corpse— "He should 
have loved me ... I offered him." 108 

Birkin had in fact wanted Gerald's virginity, if one may refer to such a 
quality in a rich Lothario to whom sex had been an exploitative hunt carried 
out against lower-class women, Minnette for example, with whom his rank 
and money assure him an easy dominance over a slavish prey. We are given 
to understand that Gerald's death is really the fault of his refusal to enter into 
a mystical relationship with Birkin before trafficking with dangerous Gu- 
drun. But Gerald isn't having any: "I know you believe something like that. 
Only I can't feel it, you see." 109 

In revenge for this refusal, the narrator heaps insult upon insult upon 
Gerald. The odd thing is that Birkin, who is a projection of Lawrence him- 
self, should have desired one who represented so completely everything the 
narrator, who is also Lawrence, despises. Gerald is really just a better-looking 
version of Anton, the mechanical man of the system, that embodiment of 
industrial mentality who is executed in The Rainbow with the author's 
wholehearted approval. 

The chapter entided "Gladiatorial," a wresding match between Birkin and 
Gerald, carried out in the luxurious Critch family library, both contestants 
being naked, is as close as Lawrence cared to come to sodomy. Held back by 
his own puritan reluctance in such matters he feels safer in flirting, since to 
his discretion, there is a strong danger of being branded effeminate. As a re- 
sult, there is always something prurient about the homosexual strain in Law- 
rence. Though his prose can be as loving a caress to the male body as any of 
Genet's, it is never as honest. Moreover, the projected masculine alliance, the 
Blutbruderschaft, is so plainly motivated by the rather sordid political pur- 

107 Lawrence, Women in Love, Preface, p. viii. 

108 Ibid., p. 471. 
108 Ibid., p. 345. 



268 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




pose of clubbing together against women, that this too gives it a perverse 
rather than a healthy and disinterested character, either as sexuality or as 
friendship. 

If Hermione is the female enemy as intellectual rival, Gudrun is the 
enemy as rival in love. She is a sculptor, Lawrence's only portrait of the 
woman as artist. Birkin, a school inspector whom we are to accept as an oracle 
in such matters, predicts she will fail, and her work is dismissed as "little 
carvings," "little things," hateful subdeties, which are a "sign of weakness." 11 * 
When Gudrun sees Gerald swimming in his ancestral lake and envies hi s 
wealth, freedom, mobility, and masculine privilege, we are given to believe 
that she is a case of penis envy with whom Ursula compares very favorably 
by accepting their poverty, pointless employment, and close supervision within 
their father's home. Ursula escapes all this by accepting Birkin as her hus- 
band and leader. For while she is merely an underpaid schoolteacher, Birkin 
is a superintendent, owns three houses, has a private income, servants, and 
an automobile. Gudrun, unmarried, continues to practice her art, a free 
lance and "Glucksritter." Much is done to persuade the reader that she has 
made the wrong decision. 

As a rebuke to the dangerous personal and artistic aspirations Gudrun rep- 
resents as the new woman, Lawrence introduces a portentous symbol— the 
African statuette of a woman in labor, reduced to the level of a suffering 
animal, her face "transfixed and rudimentary." She is said to represent the 
"extreme of physical sensation, beyond the limits of mental consciousness" 
and Birkin lectures on her meaning, proving that in the "savage woman" one 
sees the perfection of female function. Having evaded her primeval female 
fate, Gudrun is, of course, an instance of contemporary disease. Although 
she loyally defends Birkin when he is ridiculed for playing Christ, one knows 
she will never become a disciple. She is therefore to be regarded as the de- 
structive female force, the evil face of the moon. Birkin protects himself from 
such magic by stoning the image of the moon in a pond and thereby break- 
ing Ursula's sinister female mana. Gerald, who had never made adequate 
preparations, dies in the snow, the moon just rising as he freezes, the moon 
which represents Gudrun's malevolence. The Birkin-Ursula couple is the new 
pair of the new world, Gerald and Gudrun are said to be the old and 
corrupt, although it is very obvious that Gudrun is the New Woman. 

At the end of the book, Birkin is a faindy ridiculous figure, complaining to 
his wife of how his lover has slighted him. "You've got me," she naively 
reminds him. "Aren't I enough for you?" his model wife asks him, declaring 
that he is surely enough for her. "No," he said, "you are enough for me as far 
as a woman is concerned. But I wanted a man friend ... I wanted eternal 
union with a man too: another kind of love." 111 In fact, Birkin had har- 
bored ambitions for a menage a trois. The next novels will explore this theme 

110 Ibid,, pp. 32-33. 

111 Ibid., pp. 472-73. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



269 



of masculine alliance, which grows increasingly political in character, exclud- 
ing women and revenging itself upon them for the difficulty the Lawrenrian 
male has in subordinating them, turning against their demands for recog- 
nition, their claims to personality, and launching out further and further into 
the jealously guarded masculine prerogatives of formal politics, art, and 
social action. Lawrence has turned his back on love. Henceforward, it is 
power he craves: power first over women and then over lesser men. 

IV Fraternal 

Aaron's Rod is a watershed, the book where Lawrence formally renounced 
love for power, a decision he held to until Lady Chatterley's Lover. Yet, as 
Lawrence sees the two, they are not very different things— a point of view 
much in line with our premise that in patriarchal culture the relationship 
between the sexes is essentially political in nature. In Lawrence's mind, love 
had become the knack of dominating another person— power means much 
the same thing, Lawrence first defined power as the ability to dominate a 
woman; later he applied the idea to other political situations, extending the 
notion of Herrschaft to inferior males mastered by a superior male. Thralls to 
such an elite, lesser men must be as females— subjects. Of course this is the 
political structure of patriarchy itself, and Lawrence's fine new talk of dark 
gods, his jargon about spontaneous subordination, is simply a very old form 
of bullying, which in other contexts we are accustomed to call fascistic. This 
domination of lesser male by greater has homosexual overtones of a particu- 
larly unpleasant kind. For when a man with Lawrence's notion of the sexes 
starts off in search of more impressive arenas of power, arenas such as those 
afforded by formal politics, he must necessarily begin to see the men he seeks 
to dominate in erotic terms, since for him the very nature of Herrschaft is 
erotic. 

This novel is a long, hesitating romance between two versions of Lawrence 
himself: Aaron Sisson, the artist as escaped proletarian, turning his back on 
his class, and Rawdon Lilly, also a refugee among the middle classes, but now 
a successful writer and social prophet. One is struck by the narcissistic charac- 
ter of homosexuality in Lawrence. Descriptions of the two heroes are supplied 
by admiring women who see them as demigods— Aaron, powerful, handsome, 
even "glamorous," Lilly slight and nervous as was Lawrence himself, yet 
wise and dark as an Eastern idol. 

Aaron's life is a bad dream of what Lawrence's might have been, had he 
failed to escape in time. Tied to a working-class wife and three hated chil- 
dren (significantly girls), Aaron calmly abandons them on Christmas Eve. 
In striking contrast to Hardy, England's first major working-class novelist, 
who was deeply concerned with the salvation of the class in the salvation of 
the individual, Lawrence is firmly rooted in what we like to think of as a nine- 
teenth-century idea— the notion of individual salvation. The exceptional 
man will escape and rise above his class, the class itself may remain just 



2 7° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




exactly where it was. Lawrence insists on having the best of both worlds: h e 
wished to be better than the working class, educated beyond their level 
freed of their intimacy, yet at the same time he insisted on being better than 
the middle and upper class. This is why so much is made of the animal energy 
and warmth, the earthiness of the working class, making Lawrence and his 
surrogates so much the superior of those bourgeoise with whom they associ- 
ate. And it is because Lawrence believes in the rise of the talented indi- 
vidual above his class that he so hates democracy, since it seeks to raise the 
entire class together; his own preference, the promotion of the isolated case 
is feudal, or Calvinistic. 

Aaron's acceptance by the novel's flimsy smart people of the middle classes 
is instantaneous and utterly fantastic. On his first night of freedom 
he gets drunk and stumbles into a party in the house of his employer. Al- 
though very recognizably a miner, he is immediately asked to share a bed with 
his proprietor's son. Noblewomen fall in love with him; however sullenly and 
insolently he behaves; however tedious he may be with his put-on dialect 
everyone recognizes the natural aristocrat in him, and in his tuxedo he can 
pass for a gent as well as the rest. 

Aaron is the victim of a peculiar malady which one has encountered earlier 
in Lawrence's work, but is hereafter to become a prominent motif— male 
frigidity. Just as in the female, this can be a tactical weapon in sexual 
politics; in her case to resist domination, in his, to acquire it. 112 Aaron rums 
cold to punish women for a subservience he regards as insufficient. This 
strategy really began with Paul Morel, Birkin had bouts of it; with Aaron it 
is a way of life. 

While a married man, Aaron's symptoms are an exhausting "withholding 
of himself," "something in him that would not give in." 113 His wife confirms 
the diagnosis: "He kept himself back, always kept himself back, couldn't give 
himself." 114 Coolly assuming that sexuality is not only the most important, 
but even the only significant experience of which woman is capable, Aaron 
takes great pleasure in depriving her of it: "All his mad loving was only an 
effort. Afterwards, he was as devilishly unyielded as ever." 116 Of course all 

112 While masculine frigidity is a purely political affair in Lawrence, the general in- 
cidence of this misfortune in women is only occasionally political in the strict sense. The 
repudiation of sexuality, and with it, their own sexual pleasure, which one encounters in 
women, living then or now, under "Victorian" conditions, is prohably partially explicable 
on the grounds that it is the only resistance permitted them in a culture where they are 
economic and social dependents. Frigidity (which still continues today in high incidence) 
is likely to be due to an entire complex of causes: the rigid conditioning of women to fear 
and abhor sexuality, the frequently humiliating and exploitative character in which it is 
presented to them, and often perhaps, an unconscious rage asserting itself at their position 
in patriarchal culture. 

113 D. H. Lawrence, Aaron's Rod (.1922.). (New York: Viking, 1961), p. 18. 

114 Hid., p. 39, 
"SlJrfd., p. 1 55 . 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



z?i 



this is "agony and horror" 116 for a woman to endure ". . . in those supreme 
and sacred times which forher were the whole culmination of life and being, 
the ecstasy of unspeakable passional conjunction, he was not really hers. He 
w as withheld." 117 We are told that this deliberate difficultness only makes 
him more precious to woman since "her sacred sex passion" is "the most 
sacred of all things for a woman." 118 Aaron has become the male analogue 
of what folk culture calls a "cock-teaser." 

He has dinner in London with a young woman. The conversation goes 
like this: 

Josephine: "Won't you kiss me?" . , , 

Aaron: "Nay," he said. 

Josephine: "Why not?" 

Aaron: "I don't want to." 118 

Aaron later arrives at Lilly's bachelor Bat, drunk again and infected with 
influenza, brought on, we are told, because he has permitted himself to be 
seduced by the same lonely young woman : "I should have been all right if I 
hadn't given in to her," "I felt it go, inside of me, the minute I gave into her. 
It's perhaps killed me," he whines. 120 Aaron has reached the point of utter 
frustration in his relations with women: they continue to refuse him the ab- 
ject subordination he imagines is his desert as a male. After his latest hu- 
miliating experience, which has brought him to the edge of the grave, he 
resolves to be accessible only to relations with other males. Aaron and Lilly 
then commence to live in a peculiar domestic bliss, such as Simone de Beau- 
voir describes in another context as one of the "comedies of love," a wish- 
fulfilling scene whose scenario dictates that Aaron act as a surly adolescent 
in need of mothering reassurance. 

It is characteristic that when Lawrence can portray a male in bed, with 
another male in attendance, one of the two must be respectably ill, and 
nursed by the other. Accordingly, Aaron wastes away with a crudely symbolic 
stoppage of the bowels which only Lilly can cure. He does so in a remarkable 
manner, and by means of a rubdown, which is the novel's surrogate for 
sodomy. It follows another Lawrentian pattern in being a couvade as well: 

"I'm going to rub you with oil" . . . "I'm going to rub you as mothers do their 
babies whose bowels don't work" . . . Quickly he uncovered the blond lower 
body of his patient, and began to rub the abdomen with oil, using a slow, 
rhythmic, circulating motion, a sort of massage. For a long time he rubbed finely 
and steadily, then went over the whole of the lower body, mindless, as if in a 

"8 Ibid., p. 156. 

"T Ibid. 

"8 Ibid. 

no ifcid., p. 66. 

"O !!,«*,, p. 84. 



27* 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



sort of incantation. He rubbed every speck of the man's lower body— the ab- 
domen, the buttocks, the thighs and knees, down to his feet, rubbed it all warm 
and glowing, with camphorated oil, every bit of it, chaffing the toes swifdy, til] 
he was almost exhausted. Then Aaron was covered up again, and Lilly sat down 
in fatigue to look at his patient. He saw a change. The spark had come back 
into the sick eyes, and the faint trace of a smile, faintly luminous, into the face, 
Aaron was regaining himself. 121 

Newborn, the patient and the man who gave him life take up residence. 
Lilly washes and darns Aaron's socks: "He preferred that no outsider should 
see him doing these things. Yet he preferred to do them himself." 122 Lilly 
also cooks, while Aaron sits lordly and idle: "It was not in his nature to con- 
cern himself with domestic matters — and Lilly did it best alone." las What 
they have most in common is a fervid hatred of women, and it is around this 
that all their conversation revolves. Temporarily separated from his own wife, 
Lilly bewails her intractability: 

She does nothing really but resist me: my authority, or my influence, or just 
me. At the bottom of her heart, she just blindly and persistendy opposes me . . . 
She thinks I want her to submit to me. So I do, in a measure natural to our two 
selves. Somewhere, she ought to submit to me. But they all prefer to kick 
against the pricks . . . 124 

Lilly has an obsessive power urge and laments that women, and male 
disciples too, balk him: "Why can't they submit to a bit of healthy individual 
authority." 125 Together, Aaron and Lilly indulge in long misogynistic dia- 
tribes: they regard children as rivals or burdens who have given women an 
unnatural power and importance: "The whole world wags for the sake of 
the children— and their sacred mothers." "Sacred children, and sacred 
motherhood, I'm absolutely fed stiff by it," Lilly complains. 128 "When a 
woman's got her children, by God, she's a bitch in the manger," Aaron chimes 
in. "They look on a man as if he was nothing but an instrument to get and 
rear children. If I have anything to do with a woman, she thinks it's because 
you want to get children by her. And I'm damned if it is. I want my pleasure 
or nothing." "Be damned and be blasted to women and all their importance," 
cries Aaron, in a paroxysm of chauvinist sentiment, giving the war cry. 127 
Both deplore the terrible ascendancy of modem woman— their version of 
the sexual revolution. Male solidarity has crumbled before it. In both men's 

121 Ibid., pp. 90-91. 

122 Ibid., p. 93. 

123 Ibid., p. 100. 
"4 Ibid., p. 91. 
i25 Ibid. 

Wilbid., p. 94. 
127 Ibid., p. 95 , 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



273 



devotion to the cause their greatest grief is that males fail to support them — 
"the rotten whiners, they're all grovelling before a baby's napkin and a 
woman's petticoat." 128 Since the problem of the age is that male status (man- 
hood) is slipping and the masculine side of life neglected— "Men can't move 
an inch unless they grovel humbly at the end of the journey"; "The man's 
spirit has gone out of the world"; they see the reassertion of male prerogative 
as a sacred trust. 129 

The project to reduce woman from her new quasi-equality is discussed 
further in a conference the two hold with other males high up in a Floren- 
tine tower. Lawrence titles the chapter "Nel Paradiso." From the moment of 
his entrance into the city, Aaron rejoices that it is still a masculine stronghold, 
built to celebrate male beauty: "It was a town of men," whose piazzas were 
packed with men, but all, all men." 130 "Here men had been at their in- 
tensest, most naked pitch." 131 He admires the David and even the hideous 
Bandinelli as expressions of masculinity, but acting from prejudice rather 
than taste, despises the superb Perseus, because he felt the figure looked "fe- 
male . . . female and rather insignificant; graceful and rather vulgar." 132 
During the council in the tower, the problem of counterrevolutionary strategy 
is handled by an overt homosexual named Argyle, together with Lilly, Aaron, 
and an Italian major of the mandarin variety. The last warrior leads the dis- 
cussion by asserting that the real problem lies in the increase in sexual free- 
dom granted to women: 

"It used to be that desire started in the man, and the woman answered. It used 
to be so for a long time in Italy. For this reason the women were kept away 
from the men. For this reason our Catholic religion tried to keep the young 
girls in convents and innocent before marriage. So that with their minds they 
should not know, and should not start this terrible thing, this woman's desire 
over a man, beforehand." 133 

All agree that the relation between the sexes is a matter of rule or be ruled; 
all agree that the recent liberation of sexual desire in women, and particularly 
the new right of sexual initiative, place women in a position to rule. Like all 
who support an ancien regime, the acquisition of any right on the part of the 
oppressed is interpreted as a mortal infringement of their own natural 
priorities. Argyle speaks for the rest: 

"My dear boy, the balance lies in that, that when one goes up, the other goes 
down. One acts, the other takes. It is the only way in love. And the women 



208. 



12 « Ibid. 

120 Ibid. 

"o ibid., 

131 Ibid. 

« 2 Ibid. 

133 Ibid., p. Z36. 



274 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



are nowadays the active party. Oh yes, not a shadow of a doubt about it. They 
take the initiative, and the man plays up. Nice manly proceedings what!"^ 

So far none of them has found a solution to this pressing need to subjugate 
the female, and all admit that in the interim they find a pis aller in homo- 
sexuality, frigidity, etc. The Italian's ¦pis aller is little girls and prostitutes. But 
he admits that even this is no adequate alternative; prostitutes submit out of 
greed, which is not submission at all, and even girl children are "modem 
women." "Terrible thing, the modem woman," 186 Argyle sums up. Lilly had 
been playing the devil's advocate throughout by recommending his official 
doctrine of "two fighting eagles" and the stellar polarity which was Birkin's 
formula, but at the end, he "admits" that the others are right, and one realizes 
his disagreement might well have been no more than an ingenious tactic to 
spur on his comrades. 

There is really only one modern woman in the book— the Marchesa. But 
the real villain is said to be Lottie, Aaron's wife. She is anything but a femin- 
ist or new woman; she is simply poor, without hope, abandoned with three 
children. While Aaron's fantastic adventures bring him the admiration of 
ladies whom he is pleased to reject, his real enemy is the working-class wife, 
Lawrence's picture of her has that surprising disdain and malice that is typi- 
cal of his treatment of women from the class he escaped. When Aaron de- 
cides that to stay in the cramped and sordid world of the poor would 
only mean to drown, he cheerfully leaves Lottie and his little girls to sink or 
swim, embarking on the more exciting career of following patronage and 
wandering about Europe. He explains that deserting them was merely "a 
natural event," 136 which needn't even be excused with a reason, "So far man 
had yielded the mastery to women. Now he was fighting for it back again. 
And too late, for the woman would never yield." 137 Aaron is never ashamed 
to admit that he first beat his wife, then experimented with being systemati- 
cally unfaithful, and finally resorted to utterly ignoring her presence. Lottie 
is said to deserve all this because of her detestable "female will"— a terrible 
magical force which is "flat and inflexible as a sheet of iron," yet "cunning as 
a snake that could sing treacherous songs." 138 Among its other crimes it has 
enabled Lottie to retain enough dignity to oppose her inhuman treatment 
and even insist Aaron admit he has treated her unfairly. 

Aaron is characteristically arbitrary in that he regards it as perfectly natural 
she should be stuck with the children— that is woman's fate— but at the same 
time he hates her for being a mother. In his conversations with Lilly, the book 
is turned into a tract against Momism. The female is damned either way. 

lsi Ibid., p. 237 

136 Ibid., p. 239 
138 Ibid., p. 141 

137 Ibid., p. 123 
MS Ibid., p. 1 54, 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



275 



Since all refuse her autonomy or a personal destiny, Lottie can pursue no 
hope of her own and is even unequipped to earn a living when left to pro- 
vide the support of three small children. By a wonderful piece of luck, Aaron 
has a small annuity inherited from his mother. It will last Lottie for a short 
time; after that she is on her own. It is ironic that the Oedipal mother has 
come to this in Lawrence's work, and the book's savage rejection of mother- 
hood is surprising; Lottie's maternity is the only existence permitted her, yet 
by a perfection of injustice it is also her offense. Here, as everywhere else in 
the novel, Lawrence has shot past the counterrevolutionary mark of renovat- 
ing and romanticizing masculine dominance and feminine "fulfillment" in sub- 
servience, into a male "backlash" of rather alarming animus. 

Lawrence has also begun to arrogate the life-giving force entirely to the 
male: there is Lilly's feat of giving birth to Aaron, and in the symbolism of 
Aaron's "rod," or penis, his flute (Aaron is a flautist), a curious attempt is 
made to attribute to this instrument the unique power of self-generating 
life. On its better days Aaron's flute is said to put forth blossoms, a sort of 
flowering penis of art, which has rivaled and surpassed the creative function 
Lawrence first revered in the womb, and has now come to hate and ridicule 
in women, that he may expropriate it for men. 

Despite all its promise, the dedicated alliance between Aaron and Lilly is 
of short duration. Or rather, their first attempt soon causes them to flounder 
in an air of charged animosity. Despite their noble mission, cohabitation 
has brought out between them the same bone of contention they had 
sought to escape by swearing off women— the dispute over mastery. Just as it is 
inconceivable that either should debase his manhood before the other, it is 
just as difficult for two such power-hungry individuals to live without one 
attempting to subordinate the other. As a result, they squabble in a manner 
that cannot help but remind us how inescapably they are bound to the hetero- 
sexual caste system. When Aaron contradicts him, Lilly's rebuke is "You talk 
to me like a woman, Aaron." 13fl Aaron is naturally outraged at such an 
egregious insult and protests: a quarrel follows. Perhaps what appalls him 
most of all is that Lilly, who does the housework, is playing the master: "most 
irritating of all was the little man's unconscious assumption of priority." 1 ' 10 
They vacillate between homosexual attraction and the antagonism of sup- 
pressed sexual desire. "I very much wish there might be something that held 
us together," 141 Lilly proposes ruefully, but after a fortnight, the time they 
have spent together weighs on both of them as a "small eternity." 1 ' 12 

Strangely enough, it is the very cause which brought them together which 
drives them apart— male supremacy. For in their bond of masculine solidarity 
there is also a clause which demands, via the ineluctable logic of Lawrence's 

~>™lbid., p. 100. 

"»lbid. 

l-'l Ibid., p. 103. 

1411 Ibid., p. 1 01. 




2j6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



psychology of power, that should their relations assume an erotic character 
one must be subjected to the other. As they are both males, both up per 
caste, this seems impossible. "Have you any right to despise another man?" 
Aaron protests. 'When did it go by rights? . . . You answer me like a woman 
Aaron,"" 3 Lilly coolly replies, sketching out what will be Aaron's final role 
and implying that Aaron behaves like a bom inferior querulous for atten- 
tion, fairness, and recognition. All Lilly's efforts to put him in his place are 
met with Aaron's outraged protest that as a male he can't and won't have 
it. Only later, when he admits Lilly's superiority, does the stalemate admit a 
solution. But as the first try is not a success, it leaves Aaron free to bump about 
the Continent, and be picked up and patronized by two posh homosexuals 
who like his looks. Aaron likes their money and doesn't mind the admiration. 
While off on his own, Aaron's sexual frigidity toward women grows 
apace until it takes over his whole character and becomes a form of paranoia. 
Robbed in the street by some Italian soldiers, he blames his misfortune on the 
woman he has just left. Her conversation, and the party where he met her 
have put him in a rare good mood which he claims has made him vulnerable: 

". . . if I hadn't got worked up with the Marchess, and then rushed all kin- 
dled through the streets without reserve, it would never have happened. I gave 
myself away, and there was someone ready to snatch what I gave ... I should 
have been on my guard . . . always, always, with God and the devil both, I 
should be on my guard." 144 

The same rigidity of response poisons his affair with the Marchesa, first 
with frigbtened repulsion-"He knew he was sinking towards her" 145 -and 
later by burgeoning into the crassest egoism-'suddenly and newly flushed 
with his own male super-power, he was going to have his reward. The woman 
was his reward." 148 This knowledge is followed by a man's-magazine fan- 
tasy wherein he recovers from what appears to be impotence as well as frigid- 
ity, boasting he has 

something to glory in, something overweening, the powerful male passion, ar- 
rogant, royal, Jove's thunderbolt. Aaron's black rod of power, blossoming again 
with red Florentine lilies and fierce thorns. He moved about in the splendour 
of his own male lightening, invested in the thunder of the male passion-power. 
He had got it back, the male godliness, the male godhead. 147 

He hardly lives up to the event itself, for the lady insists on "withstanding 
him" and his "male super-power" and seems to be "throwing cold water over 

"3 Ibid., pp. 103-4. 
144 Ibid., p. 226. 
14 » Ibid., p. 243. 
»« Ibid., p. 250. 
wibid. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



277 



{lis phoenix newly risen from the ashes of its nest in flames." 148 Again, Aaron 
has failed to meet with the servile surrender he demands, and decides hence- 
forth to devote himself to Lilly. He goes back to his hotel delighted the affair 
has ended, rejoicing to be "alone in his own cold bed, alone, thank God." 140 
Lilly finds him there in the last chapter, and the novel's resolution lies in 
Aaron's acceptance both of Lilly's superior masculinity and his "prophetic 
message." 

This doctrine itself is a combination of political fascism and male suprem- 
acy whose emotional correspondence the book establishes with a clarity 
that excels any other analysis we have come across. Argyle begins by ridicul- 
ing a socialist demonstration as "a lot of young louts," and goes on to preach 
that "the only hope of salvation for the world lies in the reinstitution of 
slavery," 150 something everyone will soon realize "when they've had a bit 
more of this democratic washer-woman business," 181 he predicts, bringing 
down the bird of class with the stone of sexual caste. The attack on democ- 
racy, like the attack on Christianity— "I think Love and your Christ detesta- 
ble"— and socialism, derive from the same need in Lawrence— a need to de- 
bunk any system with egalitarian potentialities, sexual or social. He realizes 
these are interrelated ideas: "Because after all, all human society through the 
course of ages only enacts spasmodically, but still inevitably, the logical de- 
velopment of a given idea." 182 It follows naturally then, Lilly argues, that 
socialism sprang from the same impulse as Christianity, and Christ, like 
Marx, or the feminists, was an ugly leveler. 

"The idea and the ideal has for me gone dead— dead as carrion . . . The ideal of 
love, the ideal that it is better to give than to receive, the ideal of liberty, the 
ideal of the brotherhood of man, the ideal of the sanctity of human life . . . 
has all got the modem bee-disease and gone putrid, stinking, " lsa 

Then Lilly unburdens himself of the novel's concept of government: 

"You've got to have a sort of slavery again. People are not men: they are insects 
and instruments and their destiny is slavery . . . ultimately they will be brought 
to agree— after sufficient extermination— and then they elect for themselves a 
proper and healthy and energetic slavery ... I mean a real committal of the 
life-issue of inferior beings to the responsibility of a superior being." 154 

J« ibid., p. 252. 

149 Ibid., p. 256. It is true, however, that he has one last crack at the Marchesa a few 
days later, but as he explains, he does this only out of "compliance." 
"0 Ibid., p. 269. 
161 Ii>ii., p. 270. 
1K IW., p. 271. 

I" Ibid. 

164 Ibid., p. 272. 




278 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Lilly's racism and anti-Semitism 155 glow in a glandular rhetoric reminiscent 
of Carlyle at his worst. His baroque plan is that having achieved democratic 
recognition, the poor will elect themselves back into slavery, an idea no more 
fatuous than his hope that women will do the same. The euphemism em- 
ployed here refers to a "voluntary self gift of the inferiors." 158 

Seeing the sage one more time, Aaron is sufficiently impressed that as the 
lesson continues, he decides that 

If he had to give into something: if he really had to give in, and it seemed he 
had; then he would rather give in to the devilish Iitde Lilly than to the beastly 
people of the world. If he had to give in, then it should be to no woman and to 
no social institution. Nol-if he had to yield his willful independence, and give 
himself, then he would rather give himself to the litde, individual man than to 
any of the rest. For to tell the truth, in the man was something incompre- 
hensible, which had dominion over him, if he chose to allow it. 157 

The master begins his final pitch: "There are only two great dynamic 
urges in life: love and power." 168 After he has persuaded Aaron to admit 
that women and love are "all my eye," "lost illusions," and given a little cap- 
sule history of the modem period and the early work of D. H. Lawrence, 
Lilly explains that in regard to the "two great life-urges," love and power, we 
have erred in "trying to work ourselves . . . from the love urge . . . hating 
the power urge and repressing it. And now I find we've got to accept the 
very thing we've hated." 158 Lawrence is hereby repudiating his early work's 
concern with love and personal relationships, dedicating himself to the power 
urge that dominates his late fiction. 

Fortunately, for everyone consumed with the will to power, Lilly explains, 
there is another who wishes to be overpowered-'willing and urged to be 
overpowered." These number at least half the populace: 

Now in the urge of power ... the woman must submit, but deeply, deeply 
submit. Not to any foolish fixed authority, not to any foolish and arbitrary will. 
But to something deep, deeper. To the soul in its dark motion of power and 

155 Here is a sample of Lilly's racial attitudes: 

"I can't do with folic who teem by the billion, like the Chinese and Japs and Orientals 
altogether. Only vermin teem by the billion. Higher types breed slower ... Not like 
the flea-bitten Asiatic. Even niggers are better than Asiatics, though they are wallow- 
ers. Cp- 9*) He disposes of Jews in short order: "A jealous God! Could any race be 
anything but despicable with such an antecedent?" fp. io?\ 
™ Aaron's Rod, p. 27a. ^ 

1B8 Ifcid v p. 284. 
lm lbid., p. 288. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



279 



pride. We must reverse the poles. The woman must submit— but deeply, deeply 
and richly ... A deep unfathomable free submission. 160 

This last term would be still more absurd if Lilly had not made it clear that 
the older patriarchy used the now faintly embarrassing methods of open slav- 
ery and thereby failed to coerce a sufficiently resigned subservience in 
women: one who is forced is not really abject, only compelled. It is Law- 
rence's mission not only to revoke the minimal freedom women had so far 
achieved under the sexual revolution, but to reinstate a more complete 
patriarchy. He is even ambitious enough to seek to improve upon the old op- 
pression, especially its psychological techniques, formerly far from perfect. 

Aaron has been such a failure in his own branch of the campaign that he 
is skeptical. And as the scene is also full of erotic overtones, he is also being 
coy. "You'll never get it," he demurs. "Yes you will, if you abandon the love 
idea and the love motive," 181 Lilly insists, predicting how, from now until 
Lady Ckatterhy's Lover, Lawrence's fiction will do just this, replacing roman- 
tic interest with sexual bullying and a quietly sadistic coercion. And, Lilly 
continues, when half of humanity is overpowered— "women won't be able to 
resist"— it will be no very difficult problem to extend this force to lesser males 
as well: 

Women and men too. Yield to the deep power soul in the individual man and 
obey him implicidy . . . And men must submit to the greater soul in a man, 
for their guidance; and women must submit to the positive power-soul in man 
for their being. 182 

In the subtle difference in phrasing, we have a quick draft of the brave new 
world— every female abject before every male; most males abject before the 
super-males. 

Then, in the novel's big moment, Lilly turns to Aaron with a proposal, not 
even of love, for Lilly disdains to love, but of mastery, a curious evasion of 
physical homosexuality, but in Lawrence's terms, no less erotic: 

You, Aaron, you too have the need to submit. You too have the need livingly to 
yield to a more heroic soul, to give yourself . . . It's a life-submission. And you 
know it. But you kick against the pricks. And perhaps you'd rather die than 
yield . . . 

There was a long pause. Then Aaron looked up into Lilly's face. It was dark 
and remote-seeming. It was like a Byzantine eikon at the moment. 163 

"And whom shall I submit to?" Aaron asks with pretended naivet6. 'Your 

ie »lbid., pp. 288-89. 
lfl i Ibid., p. 289. 
ma Ibid. 
163 Ibid., pp. 289-90. 



*8o SEXUAL POLITICS 

soul will tell you," 164 replies the heroic soul right before him, bathos which 
Lawrence appears to see as darkly mysterious, and critics frequently excuse as 
inconclusive. 

Kangaroo pursues the same theme somewhat further, but its hero, Richard 
Lovat Somers, is so transparently David Herbert Lawrence, the famous 
writer, visiting Australia with his wife, that a measure of circumspection i s 
necessary, and thankfully, a bit of humor, to prevent the novel's still more 
pretentious fantasies from being utterly ridiculous. They follow the same 
patterns as those of Aaron's JfW-a rejection of woman and the pursuit of 
power in erotic relations with other men which might lead to larger- 
scale power relations over masses of men and the glory of being proclaimed a 
great leader and hero, a dictator in fact— a patriarch in the patriarchy. 

Here it is perhaps not out of place to review Lawrence's progress, via his 
well-documented Oedipus complex, to this eminence. In Women in Love 
he graduated from being a son to a lover, while switching his allegiance from 
heterosexual to homosexual alliance, having already eluded the matronly eter- 
nal feminine Freud claimed to be the lifetime object of men who 
loved their mothers. Lawrence had achieved adult male status in patriarchal 
society in becoming a husband, if not a father. He had in fact, inherited 
the social privileges which are one facet of Oedipal concern. It may even be 
that the sexual content of the Oedipus complex has been exaggerated, the 
sexual-political ignored, and it is the latter certainly which commands our 
attention with regard to Lawrence's later work. By the time of Aaron's Rod, 
the Lawrentian protagonist has tired of being a husband, ceased to be a 
lover of women altogether, and has elected instead to follow power and those 
who possess it-males. In Kangaroo, Lawrence plods on as a bored husband, 
still childless, still yearning after the power of patriarchal kingship which 
both Laius and Oedipus enjoyed. Both mother and wife are tedious to him 
now; he desires what he takes to be his by right— a man's power in a man's 
world. An artist, a bohemian and a wanderer, Lawrence found it hard to 
come by these things. Married to a stubborn woman, who though she 
did devote her life to his service, steadily refused to relinquish her dignity 
to him, he must have found the tasks of mastery exhausting. While 
none of the events outlined above are unusual— they are the ordinary progress 
of masculine experience in our culture— Lawrence is remarkable in having 
felt them so keenly and recorded them so memorably. He has stressed what 
concerned him, but in recording his rejection of the father figure in Sons 
and Lovers, and in his passionate early identification with the mother, he 
appears to have left many readers unprepared for his later rejection of the 
mother figure, followed by a greedy arrogance for masculine privilege, which 
at last grew so overweening that it veered toward extremity and invented a 
religion whose totem was the penis— his own penis at that. 

164 Ibid., p. 290. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



281 



Aaron's Rod, Kangaroo, and The Plumed Serpent are rather neglected 
novels, and perhaps jusdy so. They are unquestionably strident, and unpleas- 
ant for a number of reasons, principally a rasping protofascist tone, an in- 
creasing fondness of force, a personal arrogance, and innumerable racial, 
class, and religious bigotries. In these novels one sees how terribly Lawrence 
strained after triumph in the "man's world" of formal politics, war, priest- 
craft, art and finance. Thinking of Lady Ckatterley or the early novels, read- 
ers often equate Lawrence with the personal life which generally concerns 
the novelist, the relations of men and women— for whether he played a 
woman's man or a man's man, Lawrence was generally doing so before an 
audience of women, who found it difficult to associate him with the public 
life of male authority. After Women in Love, having solved, or failed to 
solve, the problem of mastering the female, Lawrence became more ambitious. 
Yet he never failed to take his sexual politics with him, and with an astonish- 
ing consistency of motive, made it the foundation of all his other social and 
political beliefs. 

Lovat Somers went to Australia, by his own account, simply to work and 
be alone, but in no time every man he meets is begging him to take charge 
of the country. The "Diggers," a fascist group of disgruntled war veterans, 
want him to be the brains of their coup d'etat. What heightens Somers' excite- 
ment at the thought of participating in the "masculine sphere" of government 
is not only the matey company of other males, but the deliberate exclusion 
of women, especially his bemused and serviceable wife Harriet. Writren only 
a few years after suffrage, Kangaroo makes a great point of excluding women 
even from discussions of politics. In the bright new order, they will be disen- 
franchised again and below citizen class. Yet in a man who worships the 
"dark gods" of phallic supremacy, the blemish of not having established 
seigniory in his own house is some cause for embarrassment. Lawrence even 
makes it cause for amusement in the long marital rows that relieve the tedium 
of his wordy Australian landscapes. And the more the struggle goes on in 
Lawrence, the more it seems to take out of him, and so the more absolutist 
and totalitarian he becomes in his male-supremacist beliefs, finally re- 
sorting to the magic of phallic religion. Late Lawrence novels have a tend- 
ency toward wish-fulfillment, compensatory dream to offset the author's 
failures at home. Years after his death Frieda Lawrence recorded without 
bitterness that in the midst of a terrible quarrel Lawrence backed her up 
against the wall, throtding her while he ground out, "I am the master. I am 
the master." She replied that he might be if he liked— and what of it. Law- 
rence let his hands drop in astonishment; Frieda's ready and purely verbal 
assent— "Is that all? You can be master as much as you like. I don't care"— 
had quite outwitted him. 16s 

With Kangaroo's heavy emphasis on masculine privilege, politics, and the 
public life, from which females, citizens or not, are jealously excluded, come 

165 Frieda Lawrence, op. tit., p. 341. 




282 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



a whole series of other attitudes which we have come to know in this centu 
as particularly dangerous and unpleasant: racism, a lust for violence and for 
totalitarian authority and control, a hatred for democracy, and a contempt 
for Christian humanism as a despicably "Jewish" weakness. And with these 
Kangaroo has also— for all Lawrence's hatred of democracy— a raffish tone a 
vulgarity and cheapness of effect which make it the Lawrence novel that 
commands least critical respect. There is a veteran and buddy atmosphere one 
associates with the fascist phalanxes of Italy and Hitler's early political 
cadres. It is the tone of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, the Veterans 
of Foreign Wars and the American Legion; boastfully masculine, jealous of 
prerogative, stupidly patriotic, and spoiling for a war, the white man's flag 
and the right to worship a consecrated leader. There is a "male only" ex- 
clusiveness, an enormous interest in deep, close, and cloyingly sentimental 
relationships with other men-on the Australian side, a sticky, palsy mate ap- 
proach to Somers, mixed with deference, but perhaps not quite enough to 
suit him. He turns such occasions to rich advantage, posturing as the pro- 
letarian boy made good, born of their own kind but a gentleman really. 

Lovat patronizes his colonial cousins, but he loves to be courted and is 
hoping very hard to be won. Unlike Birkin, Somers is being courted 
rather than being rejected— in fact he is desired on all sides, every man he 
meets wishes to proclaim him. And this time he can turn them down. With a 
quaint egotism Lovat permits himself to dream that the leader of a major 
party would beg, on his deathbed, that the writer grant him a caress and an 
"I love you." Lovat manages his suitors nicely— he is manly and straight, pa- 
tronizingly true to his long-suffering wife, yet enjoys the adoration of two 
males, Jack Callcott and Ben Cooley, both of whom he finds impressive and 
attractive. Their infatuation is a wonderful tribute to his vanity, and so is 
his final reluctant refusal of their advances so that he may remain a just man 
saddled with a fractious wife who has no one or nothing else in the world to 
live for. This time the Lawrence hero sees himself rejecting the other male 
as Gerald rejected Birkin. His attitude is more "passive" and "feminine," even 
coy toward his suitors; at the same time he is more grotesquely authoritarian 
and "masculine"— as the word is generally understood, toward the females. 

A queen bee to desirable males, he is "man enough" to bully his faded 
and faithful wife. Kangaroo is a bizarre account of D. H. Lawrence's extra- 
marital fantasies, fantasies which are never to be charged against him, because 
they fall just short of consummation, while yet satisfying the whole pack of 
vanities such dreams spring from. The fantasy love object is male and there 
fore, by Lawrence's lights, clearly superior to the uninteresting wifely bird in 
the hand. Yet for all the toying and flirtation, Lawrence is finally too puri- 
tanical or too timid to risk the accusation of "unnaturalness"— or more crush- 
ing— "unmanliness." He has his code, and Kangaroo's kiss is probably die 
sweeter for being foregone. By an ingenious fantasy solution, he has assimi- 
lated his cake, yet cannot be convicted of eating it. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



283 



But the imaginary and surrogate quality of these relationships convinces us 
their character is predominantly sexual-political, rather than strong or active 
homosexual impulse. Nor can love between men ever really be the issue, for 
Lawrence generally meant only power by the word love, and, during his 
later period, was actually candid enough to adopt the correct term. 

V Ritual 

The Plumed Serpent records that moment when Lawrence was led to the 
ultimate ingenuity of inventing a religion, even a liturgy, of male supremacy. 
Theological underpinnings for political systems are an old and ever-present 
need, and so in a sense, Lawrence is only being practical. One of the pillars 
of the old patriarchy was its religion, and as Lawrence was bored with Chris- 
tianity, suspicious of its egalitarian potential, and quite uninterested in other 
established creeds, it was inevitable that he should invent one of his own. Yet 
as he requires only one service of the supernatural, he is content that it as- 
sume the blunt form of phallic worship: his totemic penis is alpha and omega, 
the word improved into flesh. 

That there is a great deal of narcissism in all this was fairly obvious from 
the inception of the impulse, and a factor in many of the Blutbruderschaft 
relations described in earlier novels. His phallic cult enables Lawrence to 
achieve another goal: by investing the penis with magical powers (which 
might be slighdy harder to substantiate without a religious aura) he has been 
able to rearrange biological fact. For in the new system, life arises by a 
species of almost spontaneous generation from the penis, bypassing the 
womb. Now the penis alone is responsible for generating all the vital forces in 
the world. When one remembers the powers the womb held for Lawrence in 
The Rainbow, it is perhaps not so surprising that he should have wished to 
effect such drastic alterations in the "facts of life." 

The Plumed Serpent is the story of a religious conversion. A rather sensible 
Irish woman arrives in Mexico, falls in with two ambitious intriguers who 
wish to set themselves up as incarnations of the ancient Mexican gods in 
order to take over the country and establish a reactionary government, un- 
mistakably fascist in character, and awkwardly neo-primitivist in program. 
Mrs. Leslie is torn between her realization that this is all "high-flown bun- 
kern," and the hypnotic masculinity of Don Ramon and Don Cipriano. At 
last she capitulates to the latter and stays on, married to one man and tempted 
by both to join the pantheon in the secondary capacity of a goddess. 

The novel's point of view is the woman's; its point of interest is the two 
attractive males. The prose celebrates phallic supremacy continuously. Falling 
under Cipriano's spell, Kate Leslie is there to observe the "living male 
power," the "ancient phallic mystery," and the "ancient god-devil of the male 
Pan," "unyielding forever," "shadowy, intangible, looming suddenly tall, and 
covering the sky, making a darkness that was himself and nothing but him- 



284 



SEXUAL POLITICS 




self." 108 The heroes, Ramon and Cipriano, are Lawrentian men and mouth 
pieces, intellectual and earthy respectively. Together with the heroine, the 
form a characteristic Lawrentian triangle. Cipriano and Kate Leslie appear to 
be in love with Ramon, who appears to be in love with himself. A verv 
superior being, chief of the deities, the 'living Quetzalcoatl," brother anT 
successor to Jesus Christ, Ramon is understandably self-sufficient. But j n 
more relaxed moments, he enjoys some peculiarly erotic communions with 
Cipriano, as well as the pleasure of withholding himself from Kate, who j s 
too imperfect to deserve him. 

Leavis, and other critics, have remarked upon the impropriety of a heroine 
as the center of consciousness in this novel. 197 There is some truth in the 
objection, for Kate Leslie is a female impersonator, yet one cannot neglect 
her utility as an exemplary case of submission, and the model femininity she 
represents is surely part of her value. When presented with "the old, supreme 
phallic mystery," her behavior is unexceptional: after "submitting," and "suc- 
cumbing," she abdicates self utterly and is "swooned, prone beneath, perfect 
in her proneness." 168 

Ah! and what a mystery of prone submission, on her part, this huge erection 
would imply! Submission absolute, like the earth under the sky. Beneath an 
over-arching absolute. Ah! what a marriage! How terrible! and how complete! 
With a finality of death, and yet more than death. The arms of the twilit Pan. 
And the awful, half-intelligible voice from the cloud. She could conceive now 
her marriage with Cipriano; the supreme passivity, like the earth below the 
twilight, consummate in living lifelessness, the sheer solid mystery of passivity. 
Ah, what an abandon, what an abandon, what an abandon!—" 169 

Overcome by the prospect of this supine future, the lady exclaims "My de- 
mon lover!" this last epithet a sad instance of Coleridge fallen to the excited 
cliche of magazine prose. 170 

Kate Leslie is an exemplum, an object lesson placed so as to lead other 
women "back to the twilight of the ancient Pan world, where the soul of 
woman was dumb, to be forever unspoken." 171 Her vertiginous passivity is 
not only an admonition to her sex, but something the author appears to enjoy 
playing at himself. Through the device of the heroine, Lawrence has found 
a vehicle to fantasize what seems to be his own surrender to the dark and 
imperious male in Cipriano. 

Throughout the novel, Kate Leslie is schooled in the author's notions of 

168 D. H. Lawrence, The Plumed Serpent (1916). (New York: Viking 1951) 
p. 341- 

107 See F. R. Leavis, D. H. Lawrence, Novelist (New York: Knopf, 1956), p. 70. 

168 Lawrence, The Plumed Serpent, p. 341. 

ie » Ibid., p. 342. 

noibiA. 

"i Ibid. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



285 



primeval truth. Learning that the salvation of the world lies in a reassertion 
of virility which will also make it possible for women to fulfill their true 
nature as passive objects and perfect subjects to masculine rule, she under- 
goes marriage in the new religion, devoutly kissing the feet of her new lord 
as the service commands her. She studies laboriously to relinquish her will 
and her individual selfhood, as Lawrence is very punctilious in assuring us 
female will is an evil and male will a blessing. Yet for all this, one can be 
fairly sure she won't last very long. Even within the novel it is predicted that 
she will end as some sort of human sacrifice, a repellent ritual to which the 
new order is given, described in shocking detail and with a complicity in its 
barbarism that makes the reader anxious for Lawrence's sanity. Ramon 
warns her, "if you lived here alone . . . and queened it for a time, you 
would get yourself murdered— or worse— by the people who had worshipped 
you." 172 Even as a member of the new regime, her status is so tenuous that 
her anxious premonitions carry great force: "After all, she was a gringita, 
and she felt it. A sacrifice? Was she a sacrifice? . . . Now she was con- 
demned to go through these strange ordeals, like a victim." 173 

Lawrence wrote "The Woman Who Rode Away" during the same period 
as The Plumed Serpent, and it is something of a sequel to it. The short story 
does accomplish the human sacrifice of the female to Lawrence's phallic sect 
and it is therefore a somewhat franker version of events than the novel. It is 
the story of a woman in an unhappy marriage, one Lawrence himself de- 
scribes as an "invincible slavery," which has left her "conscious development 
. . . completely arrested." 17 * On an adventurous gamble, the woman, who 
significandy is never individualized by a name, rides away into the desert to 
join the Mexican Indians. She is clearly a woman who needs to run away— 
to something. What is curious is what Lawrence finds for her to run away to 
—a death which is astounding in the sadism and malice with which it is 
conceived. 

The cult of primitivism, which provided Lawrence with so much aesthetic 
gratification, has its political side as well. Having seen in the feminist move- 
ment a surge toward the civilized condition which the male had enjoyed so 
long, Lawrence identified the female (at least his target, the New Woman) 
as a rather sophisticated enemy. This is quite the opposite tack from that 
taken by his contemporaries, Faulkner and Joyce, to name two examples, who 
were fond of presenting woman as "nature" "unspoiled primeval under- 
standing," and the "eternal feminine." Even Freud, with whom Lawrence 
agrees so well on female character in the matters of passivity and masochism, 
imagined the female to be a fairly harmless savage. While Lawrence is de- 
termined to keep that part of civilization he approves in male hands, he is also 

"^ Ibid., p. 478. 
mibid., p. 369. 

174 D. H. Lawrence, The Woman Who Rode Away (192.8). (New York: Knopf, 
1928), Berkeley Medallion Edition, p. 8. 



i86 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



realistic enough to acknowledge that since the new breed have arrived 
the female has actually escaped the primitive condition others assume to he 
her nature. Drastic steps must be taken if she is going to be coerced back into 
it: her will must be broken, her newly found ego destroyed. That is why the 
heroines of Lawrence's novels spend each book learning their part as females 
Indeed, so little can one trust to nature in these matters, that very severe 
measures must occasionally be taken. "The Woman Who Rode Away" is just 
this sort of measure. Critics fudge the meaning of this story by mumbli™ 
vaguely that it is all allegorical, symbolic." Of course it is-symbolic in the 
same sense as a head exposed on London Bridge. 

The idea of leaving the emancipated woman to the "savage" to kill, delegat- 
ing the butchery as it were, is really an inspiration; sexism can appear thereby 
to be liberal and anti-colonialist. Lawrence is able to relish the beauty of 
dark-skinned males, while congratulating them on what, despite his usual 
fastidious distaste for non-Aryans, he regards as their stellar virtue-they 
"keep their women in their place." This is a common fantasy of the white 
world, the favorite commodity of western movies and the Asian-African spec- 
taculars. Such epics follow a well-paved story line which satisfies a host of 
white male expectations: the white woman is captured by "savages"-and "we 
all know how they treat their women"; she is forced to live in a state of utter 
humiliation and abjection, raped, beaten, tortured, finally stripped and 
murdered."" Such little comedies serve to titillate the white male, intimidate 
his woman," and slander the persons upon whom the white male has shifted 
the burden of his own prurient sadism. 

Lawrence has improved upon the rape fantasy by sterilizing the story-re- 
moving all traces of overt sexual activity and replacing them with his home- 
made mythoJogy-the woman is sacrificed to the sun. But there is a sincere 
"religious impulse" in the tale, apart from the inanities of the pseudo-Indian 
legend, for the story is Lawrence's most impassioned statement of the doctrine 
of male supremacy and the penis as deity. The fraudulent myth also prevents 

" B Both Leavis and Tindall take this line. See Leavis' D. H. Lawrence, Novelist, 
and Wilham York Tindall, The Later D. H. Laurence (New York: Knopf, 1952). 

»e Lawrence has a number of stories like this: "None of That" is a grim little piece 
of hate about an American woman who is gang-raped by a group of shoddy toreadors in 
gratitude for the fortune she wills to one of them; "The Princess" gives an account of a 
Mexican guide who rapes and imprisons an American in the mountains-a story done with 
inhmte malice and sexual enmity. There is a premonition of the Lawrence who wrote 
the Woman Who Rode Away" as early as Sons and Lovers, when little Paul Morel 
performs strange rites upon his sister Annie's doll. Having broken her "accidentally " he 
suggests "Let's make a sacrifice of Arabella . . . Let's bum her." Having found her face 
stupid he stands by, watching with satisfaction while the figure melts, then takes the 
charred remains and smashes them with stones. Annie, whose only toy this had been 
stands by helpless and understandably disturbed while Paul shouts, "that's the sacrifice 
of Misses Arabella ... And I'm glad there's nothing left of her." Sons an d Lovers, 
PP 57-58. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



287 



the story from appearing as the pandering to pornographic dream that it is. 
On one level of intention, "The Woman Who Rode Away" would reward a 
careful comparative reading with TJie Story of O; in a number of ways it 
resembles commercial hard core. 

The office of sexual avenger is of course left in the hands of the dark male. 
Non-Aryan Females, like proletarian women, held no interest whatsoever for 
Lawrence, and never appear in the story. Psychologically, the very pattern of 
the tale cleverly provides satisfactions for the white male's guilt feelings 
over the dark peoples and "primitives" whom he exploits. He will atone by 
throwing them his woman to butcher, advancing his dominion over her 
in the process, and substituting his own rival as the scapegoat for imperialist 
excesses. And the liberal, the humanistic, and the well meaning among 
his numbers are satisfied with the fable at its surface level, while the aggres- 
sive, the malign, and the sadistic are provided with greater sustenance below 
the surface. 

It has been fashionable for some time to visit the white man's sins on "his 
woman." Even LeRoi Jones adopts this line of attack in The Dutchman, 
punishing all whites in the caricature of Lulu, thereby avoiding the more 
explosive run in with "the man." Genet, whose perceptions are more acute, 
realizes that the ravishment of the white woman is in reality but an endless, 
self-seeking white fantasy. This maniacal myth has been both cause and ex- 
cuse for the white master's reaction to the alleged death or despoilment of 
"his woman" which has brought on so many atrocities in our national past. 
So in Genet's play, The Blacks, the black "actors" replay "the murder of a 
white woman" before their white audience, because they know that it is the 
best entertainment they could offer to interest such a crowd, who are, 
incidentally, their court of judgment. When the "murder" is revealed as a 
sham— there is nothing beneath the "catafalque"— it was empty air, an idea, 
Whiteness itself which the blacks assassinated— the white court are incensed 
beyond all reason. "You kill us without killing us," they clamor. 177 What 
Genet had been investigating was not the fact of racial or sexual violence, but 
the psychic bases of racial-sexual beliefs, exposing them as the myths of a 
political system. 

Lawrence's cautionary tale for white women has odd assumptions common 
to the white mind: that the dark peoples of the world are fascinated and ar- 
rested by yellow hair, an axiomatic assumption of those white fairy tales like 
Lord Jim. It is a common white fancy that when one of the blond folk go to 
the dark peoples the latter are so overawed, they make him god or king, an 
event highly satisfactory to his vanity. Lawrence makes this old chestnut do 
service again while punishing the white woman in the process, The following 



177 Jean Genet, The Blacks, A Clown Show (1958), translated from the French by 
Bernard Frechrman (New York: Grove Press, i960), p. 98. 




288 SEXUAL POLITICS 

passage works on both assumptions, and while it humiliates the woman 
flatters white egocentricity at the same time: ' 

There was now absolute silence. She was given a little to drink, then two priests 
took off her mantle and her runic, and in her strange pallor she stood there be 
tween the lurid robes of the priests, beyond the pillar of ice, beyond and above 
the dark-faced people. The throng below gave the low, wild cry. Then the 
priest turned her round, so she stood with her back to the open world, her lone 
blond hair to the people below. And they cried again. 178 ' 

The scene is shot in MGM technicolor, the whole story reeks of Hollywood 
but it also satisfies voyeurism, a sadistic sort of buggery, and the white dream 
of being uplifted and proclaimed. 

One is always struck by the sexual ambiguity in Lawrence. The woman of 
the fable is bent on going toward death like a bird hypnotized by the eye of a 
snake. But her fatalism is never explained, save in Lawrence's obsessive wish 
to murder her. There is a strange quality about this fatalism: while it is sup- 
posed to represent the decline of the West or some other abstraction, the 
narrative derives its power from a participation on the part of the author 
himself which appears to derive from perverse needs deep in Lawrence's own 
nature. There is as much attention lavished upon the masochistic as upon 
the sadistic, and one perceives a peculiar relish for the former in the author, a 
wallowing in the power of the Indian male, his beauty and indifference and 
cruelty, exerted not only on the silly woman, his victim, but on Lawrence 
too. It is the author himself standing fascinated before this silent and darkly 
beautiful killer, enthralled, aroused, awaiting the sacrificial rape. 

Yet the real interest in the story is in the crushing of the woman's will, 
of which the murder is merely a consummation. As with the Story of 0, 
or much of "exotic" pornography (e.g. that set in Near and Far Eastern or 
in primitive cultures, where a real or assumed contempt for women rational- 
izes the large dose of sexual sadism which caused the author to choose such 
a locale to begin with), the interest is not in the physical pain infiicted but 
in the damage done to will and spirit, the humiliation of the human claim 
or dignity of the victim. Progress is measured in hundreds of phrases like 
this: ". . . she was very tired. She lay down on a couch of skins ... and 
she slept, giving up everything" 179 . . . "she was utterly strange and be- 
yond herself, as if her body were not her own." 180 Imprisoned in a little 
hut, drugged day after day as the torture drags on, vomiting continuously, 
she is reduced to a phenomenal despair and passivity "as if she had no con- 
trol over herself." 18 ' Lawrence lingers over her gradual relinquishment of 

178 Lawrence, The Woman Who Rode Away, p, 39. 
178 Ibid., p. 24. 
1S " Ibid,, p, 24. 
181 Ibid., p. 2;. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



289 



selfhood: "She was not in her own power, she was under the spell of some 
other control. And at times she had moments of terror and horror . . . the 
Indians would come and sit with her, casting their insidious spell over her 
by their very silent presence ... As they sat they seemed to take her will 
away, leaving her will-less and victim to her own indifference." 182 

The message— for this story has a message— is revealed at last in a central 
passage, when the author delivers a formal lecture to the modern woman: 

In the strange towering symbols on the heads of the changeless, absorbed women, 
she seemed to read once more the Mene Mene Tekel Upharsin. Her kind of 
womanhood, intensely personal and individual, was to be obliterated again, and 
the great primeval symbols were to tower once more over the fallen individual 
independence of women. The sharpness and the quivering nervous consciousness 
of the highly-bred white woman was to be destroyed again, womanhood was to 
be cast once more into the great stream of impersonal sex and impersonal 
passion. Strangely, as if clairvoyant, she saw the immense sacrifice prepared, and 
she went back to her little house in a trance of agony. 183 



Well she might. With bemused pity one contemplates those women of Africa, 
Asia, and South America, lobbying in the United Nations for civil rights. 
Sadly misled, they have failed to grasp Lawrence's wise understanding of 
the impropriety in their hope of sexual revolution— and their own impor- 
tance as models to the rest of their sex. 

Now that the sermon has been delivered, the proceedings may continue: 
"She felt always in the same relaxed, confused, victimized state . . . This 
at length became the only state of consciousness she really recognized, this 
exquisite sense of bleeding out into the higher beauty and harmony of 
things." 184 The last phrase is pure gas, but there is no mistaking its inten- 
tion. Of course, much is made of the masochistic nature of the female, called 
on to justify any ghastliness perpetrated upon her: "She knew she was a 
victim, that all this elaborate work upon her was the work of victimizing 
her. But she did not mind. She wanted it." 185 Of all masculine fantasies, 
this is perhaps the most revered; not only does it rationalize any atrocity, but 
even more to the point, it puts such action beyond the moral pale— all these 
enormities only satisfy her inherent nature" Freud had provided the scien- 
tific justification for sadism; Lawrence was not slow to buy the product. 

Every effort is made to humiliate her. Since Lawrence's notion of huhris 
is a woman who exhibits any self-assurance, she is rewarded for speaking to 
the Indians who capture her with cuts at the horse she rides, throwing 

162 Ibid., p. 27. 

183 lJ,aJ v p. 2 <j, Needless to say, the "symbol" which will tower over the fallen freedom 
of women is none other than the phallus. 
wibid., p. 31. 
185Ji)lU, p. 36. 




2g° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



her painfully in the saddle at every step. Later Lawrence has her dismount 
and crawl. Other details savored are the gratuitous insult of the animal she 
shares her prison with, "a little female dog," and her rabbitlike tenor as she 
is carried to her death; "she sat looking out of her litter with her big trans- 
fixed blue eyes . . . the wan markings of her drugged weariness." 188 

Her captors, who are the embodiment of an idea, and bear no resemblance 
to living beings of any race whatsoever, are supernatural males, who are 
"beyond sex" in a pious fervor of male supremacy that disdains any genital 
contact with women preferring instead to deal with her by means of a 
knife. These are the final priests of Lawrence's phallicism: "There was noth- 
ing sensual or sexual in [their] look. It had a terrible glittering purity" 187 
. . . "there was not even derision in the eyes. Only that intense, yet remote 
inhuman glitter which was terrible to her. They were inaccessible. They 
could not see her as a woman at all," 188 We are informed incessandy that 
they are "darkly and powerfully male," 189 yet paradoxically, we are told of 
their "silent, seodess, powerful, physical presence." 190 There is no real con- 
tradiction here for in this apotheosis of puritanical pornography, Lawrence 
has separated sexuality from sex. The ersatz Indians are ultimate maleness 
and therefore can have no relationship with the female, as they are entirely 
beyond trucking with her. By "male," Lawrence simply means oppressive 
force, a charisma of mastery, "something primevally male and cruel," 101 "the 
ancient fierce human male." 182 Naturally, this is incompatible with any sex- 
ual activity, for such might introduce the danger of communicating with 
or even gratifying a woman. Their relations with their female victim are of 
an antiseptic antisexual quality which is remarkably obscene, both in its 
arrogance and in its deliberately inhuman quality: 

"You must take off your clothes, and put these on." 

"If all you men will go out," she said. 

"No one will hurt you," he said quietly. 

"Not while you men are here," she said. 
He looked at the two men by the door. They came quickly forward and sud- 
denly gripped her arms as she stood, without hurting her, but with great power. 
Then two of the old men came, and with curious skill slit her boots down with 
keen knives, and drew them off, and slit her clothing so that it came away from 
her. In a few moments she stood there white and uncovered. The old man 
on the bed spoke, and they turned her round for him to see. He spoke again, 

188 Ibid., pp. 37-38. 

187 Ibid., p. 20. 

188 Ibid., p. 18. 
l«eifefd., p. 27. 

"0 Ibid., italics added. 
J»i Ibid., p. 35. 
i»2 Ifei4., p. 29. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



291 



and the young Indian deftly took the pins and comb from her fair hair, so that 
it fell over her shoulders in a bunchy tangle. 

Then the old man spoke again. The Indians led her to the bedside. The 
white-haired, glassy-dark old man moistened his finger-tips at his mouth, and 
most delicately touched her on the breasts and on the body, then on the back. 
And she winced strangely, each time, as the finger-tips drew along her skin, as it 
Death itself were touching her. 193 

It is by no means incongruous that the victim feels the touch of death— 
this is how Lawrence's male supremacy manifests itself at last— lethal, 
an utter denial of sexuality, of life, and of fertility. One cannot become more 
sterile than this. The final rites take place before a phallic totem of ice, 
and there is wonderful propriety in the detail that this penis is an icicle: 

Facing, was a great wall of hollow rock, down the front of which hung a great 
dripping fang-like spoke of ice. The ice came pouring over the rock from the 
precipice above, and then stood arrested, dripping out of high heaven, almost 
down to the hollow stones where the stream-pool should be below. But the pool 
was dry . . . They stood her facing the iridescent column of ice, which fell 
down marvellously arrested. 104 

In the images of genital topography the reader may perceive the supernatural 
origin of the penis (dropping out of high heaven), the miracle of an erection 
(marvellously arrested), and the negation of the womb (a dry pond). The 
ice-pick is Lawrence's god, an idol, his image of the holy. This is what phallic 
consciousness can accomplish. 

Before the penetration of death, the victim is to be purified, "fumigated," 
mauled, rubbed and the reader stimulated through a method possibly the 
most frankly auto- or perhaps antierotic in pornographic literature. These bits 
are generally quoted on the flyleaf of cheap paper editions as sex bait— the 
attraction is obvious. 

In the darkness and in the silence she was accurately aware of everything that 
happened to her: how they took off her clothes, and standing her before a great, 
weird device on the wall, colored blue and white and black, washed her all 
over with water . . . Then they laid her on a couch under another great in- 
decipherable image of red and black and yellow, and now rubbed all her body 
with sweet-scented oil, and massaged ail her limbs, and her back, and her sides, 
with a long, strange, hypnotic massage. Their dark hands were incredibly 
powerful, yet soft with a water softness she could not understand. And the 
dark faces, leaning near her white body, she saw were darkened with red 
pigment, with lines of yellow round the cheeks. And the dark eyes glittered ab- 
sorbed, as the hands worked upon the soft white body of the woman, 

193 Ibid., pp. 23-24. 
IM Ibid., pp. 38-39. 



3<)2 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



When she was fumigated, they laid her on a large fiat stone, the four powerful 
men, holding her by the outstretched arms and legs. Behind her stood the aged 
man, like a skeleton coveted with dark glass, holding the knife and dansfixedly 
watching the sun and behind him was another naked priest with a knife.iw 

All sadistic pornography tends to find its perfection in murder. Lawrence's 
movie priests themselves seem to understand the purpose of the rites and 
are "naked and in a state of barbaric ecstasy," 196 as they await the moment 
when the sun, phallic itself, strikes the phallic icicle, and signals the phal- 
lic priest to plunge the phallic knife— penetrating the female victim and 
cutting out her heart— the death fuck. 107 

With elaborate care, Lawrence has plotted the sexualized landscape to coin- 
cide with the sexual scenario— as his victim lies poised and waiting, he works 
up suspense; 

Turning to the sky she looked at the yellow sun. It was sinking. The shaft of ice 
was like a shadow between her and it. And she realized that the yellow rays 
were filling half the cave though they had not reached the altar where the fire 
was, at the far end of the funnel shaped cavity. Yes, the rays were creeping round 
slowly. As they grew ruddier, they penetrated farther. When the red sun was 
about to sink, he would shine full through the shaft of ice deep into the hollow 
of the cave to the innermost. She understood now that this was what the men 
were waiting for . . . And their ferocity was ready to leap out into a mystic 
exultance, of triumph . . . Then the old man would strike, and strike home, 
accomplish the sacrifice and achieve the power. 188 

This is a formula for sexual cannibalism: substitute the knife for the 
penis and penetration, the cave for a womb, and for a bed, a place of execu- 
tion—and you provide a murder whereby one acquires one's victim's power. 
Lawrence's demented fantasy has arranged for the male to penetrate the 
female with the instrument of death so as to steal her mana. As he supposes 
the dark races envy the white, who in his little legend, have "stolen their 
sun," Lawrence himself seems envious, afraid— murderous. 

The act here at the center of the Lawrentian sexual religion is coitus as 
killing, its central vignette a picture of human sacrifice performed upon the 
woman to the greater glory and potency of the male. But because sexual 
potency could accomplish little upon a corpse, it is painfully obvious that 

185 Ibid., pp. 36 and 39. 

188 ibid. 

197 Curiously enough, Lawrence has created a realization of the popular equation of 
sexuality and violence one finds, for example, in street language, where our obsessive 
cultural habit of sexual loathing causes "fuck" to become synonymous with kill, hurt, or 
destroy. 

1Q *lbid. t pp. 39-40. 



D. H. LAWRENCE 



293 



the intention of the fable is purely political. The conversion of human geni- 
tals into weapons has led him from sex to war. Probably it is the perversion of 
sexuality into slaughter, indeed, the story's very travesty and denial of sexu- 
ality, which accounts for its monstrous, even demented air. 



SIX 



Henry ^Ciller 



Certain writers are persistently misunderstood. Henry Miller is surely one 
of the major figures of American literature living today, yet academic ped- 
antry still dismisses him as beneath scholarly attention. He is likely to be 
one of the most important influences on our contemporary writing, but offi- 
cial criticism perseveres in its scandalous and systematic neglect of his work. 1 
To exacerbate matters, Miller has come to represent the much acclaimed 
"sexual freedom" of the last few decades. One finds eloquent expression of 
this point of view in a glowing essay by Karl Shapiro: "Miller's achievement 
is miraculous: he is screamingly funny without making fun of sex . . . ac- 
curate and poetic in the highest degree; there is not a smirk anywhere in 
his writings. 2 Shapiro is confident that Miller can do more to expunge the 
"obscenities" of the national scene than a "full-scale social revolution." 3 
Lawrence Durrell exclaims over "bow nice it is for once to dispense with the 
puritans and with pagans," since Miller's books, unlike those of his con- 

1 It may be that his own eccentricity in granting permission is also a factor: Miller 
regards permission to quote as a personal endorsement of the critic's views. Unfortunately 
space does not permit me to pay tribute to Henry Miller's considerable achievement as 
an essayist, autobiogiapher and surrealist; my remarks are restricted to an examination 
of Miller's sexual ethos. 

2 Karl Shapiro, "The Greatest Living Author," reprinted as an introduction to the 
Grove Press edition of Tropic of Cancer (New York: Grove Press, 1961), p. xvi. 

& Ibid., p. xviii. 



HENRY MILLER 



295 



temporaries, are "not due to puritanical shock." 4 Shapiro assures us that 
Miller is "the first writer outside the Orient who has succeeded in writing 
as naturally about sex on a large scale as novelists ordinarily write about the 
dinner table or the battlefield." 5 Significant analogies. Comparing the Tropic 
of Cancer with Joyce's Ulysses, Shapiro gives Miller the advantage, for 
while Joyce, warped by the constraints of his religious background, is pru- 
rient or "aphrodisiac," Miller is "no aphrodisiac at all, because religious or 
so-called moral tension does not exist for him." 6 Shapiro is convinced that 
"Joyce actually prevents himself from experiencing the beauty of sex or lust, 
while Miller is freed at the outset to deal with the overpowering mysteries 
and glories of love and copulation." 7 

However attractive our current popular image of Henry Miller the liber- 
ated man may appear, it is very far from being the truth. Actually, Miller 
is a compendium of American sexual neuroses, and his value lies not in 
freeing us from such afflictions, but in having had the honesty to express 
and dramatize them. There is a kind of culturally cathartic release in Mil- 
ler's writing, but it is really a result of the fact that he first gave voice to 
the unutterable. This is no easy matter of four-letter words; they had been 
printed already in a variety of places. What Miller did articulate was the 
disgust, the contempt, the hostility, the violence, and the sense of filth with 
which our culture, or more specifically, its masculine sensibility, surrounds 
sexuality. And women too; for somehow it is women upon whom this oner- 
ous burden of sexuality falls. There is plenty of evidence that Miller him- 
self is fleetingly conscious of these things, and his "naive, sexual heroics" 
would be far better if, as one critic suggests, they had been carried all the 
way to "self-parody." 8 But the major flaw in his oeuvre— too close an iden- 
tification with the persona, "Henry Miller"— always operates insidiously 
against the likelihood of persuading us that Miller the man is any wiser 
than Miller the character. 

And with this Miller; though one has every reason to doubt the strict 
veracity of those sexual exploits he so laboriously chronicles in the first 
person, though one has every reason to suspect that much of this "fucking" 
is sheer fantasy— there is never reason to question the sincerity of the emotion 
which infuses such accounts; their exploitative character; their air of juvenile 
egotism. Miller's genuine originality consists in revealing and recording a 
group of related sexual attitudes which, despite their enormous prevalence 
and power, had never (or never so explicitly) been given literary exptes- 

4 Bern Porter, The Happy Rock (Berkeley, Packard Press, 1945), pp. i-4- 

5 Shapiro, op. cit., pp. xvi-xvii. 
* Ibid., p. xvii. 

7 Ibid., pp. xvii-xviii. 

8 lhab Hassan, The Literature of Silence, Henry Miller and Samuel Beckett (New 
York: Knopf, 1967), p. 10. 

9 1 am pleased to find that Hassan agrees with me here. 



296 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



sion before. Of course, these attitudes are no more the whole truth than 
chivalry, or courtly, or romantic love were— but Miller's attitudes do consti- 
tute a kind of cultural data heretofore carefully concealed beneath our tradi- 
tional sanctities. Nor is it irrelevant that the sociological type Miller's im- 
pressions represent is that of a brutalized adolescence. The sympathy they 
elicit is hardly confined to that group but strikes a chord of identification 
in men of all ages and classes, and constituting an unofficial masculine ver- 
sion of both sexuality and the female which— however it appears to be at 
variance with them— is still vitally dependent on the official pieties of love: 
mother, wife, virgin, and matron. The anxiety and contempt which Miller 
registers toward the female sex is at least as important and generally felt as 
the more diplomatic or "respectful" version presented to us in conventional 
writing. 10 In fact, to hear Miller bragging of having "broken down" a "piece 
of tail" is as bracing as the sound of honest bigotry in a redneck after hours 
of Senator Eastland's unctuous paternalism. 

Miller regards himself as a disciple of Lawrence, a suggestion certain to 
have outraged the master had he lived to be so affronted. The liturgical pomp 
with which Lawrence surrounded sexuality bears no resemblance to Miller's 
determined profanity. The Lawrentian hero sets about his mission with noto- 
rious gravity and "makes love" by an elaborate political protocol. In the proc- 
ess, by dint of careful diplomacy and expert psychological manipulation, he 
effects the subjection of the woman in question. But Miller and his confed- 
erates—for Miller is a gang— just "fuck" women and discard them, much as 
one might avail oneself of sanitary facilities— Kleenex or toilet paper, for 
example. Just "fucking," the Miller hero is merely a huckster and a con man, 
unimpeded by pretension, with no priestly role to uphold. Lawrence did 
much to kill off the traditional attitudes of romantic love. At first glance, 
Miller seems to have started up blissfully ignorant of their existence alto- 
gether. Actually, his cold-blooded procedure is intended as sacrilege to the 
tenderness of romantic love, a tenderness Lawrence was never willing to 
forgo. In his brusque way, Miller demonstrates the "love fraud" (a species 
of power play disguised as eroticism) to be a process no more complex than 
a mugging. The formula is rather simple: you meet her, cheat her into letting 
you have "a piece of ass," and then take off. Miller's hunt is a primitive 
find, fuck, and forget. 

Among other things, it was a shared dislike for the sexual revolution that 
sparked Miller's admiration and drove him to undertake a long essay on 
Lawrence: 

It seems significant that, with all the power that was in him, Lawrence strove to 
put woman back in her rightful place . . . The masculine world . . . deeply 

10 1 bave in mind not only traditional courtly, romantic, and Victorian sentiment, but 
even that of other moderns. Conrad, Joyce, even Faulkner, never approach the sexual 
hostility one finds in Miller. 



HENRY MILLER 



297 



and shamefully feminized, is . . . inclined to distrust and despise Lawrence's 
ideas . . . what he railed against and fought tooth and nail . . . the sickly ideal 
love world of depolarized sex! The world based on a fusion of the sexes in- 
stead of an antagonism . . . [for] the eternal battle with woman sharpens our 
resistance, develops our strength, enlarges the scope of our cultural achieve- 
ments: through her . . . we build . . . our religions, philosophies and 
sciences. 11 

There is a similarity of purpose here, but what Miller fails to recognize, or 
at least to comment upon, is the total disparity of their methods. Lawrence 
had turned back the feminist claims to human recognition and a fuller social 
participation by distorting them into a vegetative passivity calling itself ful- 
fillment. His success prepared the way for Miller's escalation to open con- 
tempt. Lawrence had still to deal with persons; Miller already feels free to 
speak of objects. Miller simply converts woman to "cunt"— thing, commodity, 
matter. There is no personality to recognize or encounter, so there is none 
to tame or break by the psychological subtleties of Lawrence's Freudian 
wisdom. 

While both writers enlist the fantastic into the service of sexual politics, 
Lawrence's use seems pragmatically political, its end is to compel the emo- 
tional surrender of an actual woman, generally a person of considerable 
strength and intelligence. Miller confronts nothing more challenging than 
the undifferentiated genital that exists in masturbatory revery. In the case 
of the two actual women, Maude and Mara, who appear in Miller's world 
amidst its thousand floozie caricatures, personality and sexual behavior is 
so completely unrelated that, in the sexual episodes where they appear, any 
other names might have been conveniently substituted. For the purpose of 
every bout is the same: a demonstration of the hero's self-conscious detach- 
ment before the manifestations of a lower order of life. During an epic 
encounter with Mara, the only woman he ever loved, Miller is as clinical as 
he was toward Ida; Mara just as grotesque: 



And on this bright and slippery gadget Mara twisted like an eel. She wasn't any 
longer a woman in heat, she wasn't even a woman; she was just a mass of inde- 
finable contours wriggling and squirming like a piece of fresh bait seen upside 
down through a convex mirror in a rough sea. 

I had long ceased to be interested in her contortions; except for the part of 
me that was in her I was cool as a cucumber and remote as the Dog Star . . . 

Towards dawn, Eastern Standard Time, I saw by that frozen condensed-milk 
expression about the jaw that it was happening. Her face went through all the 
metamorphoses of early uterine life, only in reverse. With the last dying spark it 

11 Henry Miller, "Shadowy Monomania," Sunday After the War (New Directions, 
New York, 1944), pp. 2,59-61. 



298 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



collapsed like a punctured bag, the eyes and nostrils smoking like toasted acotns 
in a slighdy wrinkled lake of pale skin, 12 

The Victorians, or some of them, revealed themselves in their slang ex- 
pression for the orgasm— "to spend"— a term freighted with economic insecu- 
rity and limited resources, perhaps a reflection of capitalist thrift implying 
that if semen is money (or time or energy) it should be preciously hoarded. 33 
Miller is no such cheapskate, but in his mind, too, sex is linked in a curious 
way with money. By the ethos of American financial morality, Miller was 
a downright "failure" until the age of forty; a writer unable to produce, liv- 
ing a seedy outcast existence, jobless and dependent on handouts. Before 
exile in Paris granted him reprieve, Miller felt himself the captive of cir- 
cumstances in a philistine milieu where artistic or intellectual work was 
despised, and the only approved avenues of masculine achievement were 
confined to money or sex. Of course, Miller is a maverick and a rebel, but 
much as he hates the money mentality, it is so ingrained in him that he is 
capable only of replacing it with sex— a transference of acquisitive im- 
pulse. By converting the female to commodity, he too can enjoy the esteem 
of "success." If he can't make money, he can make women— if need be on 
borrowed cash, pulling the biggest coup of all by getting something for noth- 
ing. And while his better "adjusted" contemporaries swindle in commerce, 
Miller preserves his "masculinity" by swindling in cunt. By shining in a 
parallel system of pointless avarice whose real rewards are also tangential 
to actual needs and likewise surpassed by the greater gains run up for 
powerful egotism, his manly reputation is still assured with his friends. 

When reporting on the civilized superiority of French sex, his best proof is 
its better business method. The whore's client is "permitted to examine and 
handle merchandise before buying," a practice he congratulates as "fair and 
square." 14 Not only is the patron spared any argument from the "owner of 
the commodity," overseas trade is so benevolent that there is nothing "to 
hinder you should you decide to take a half-dozen women with you to a 
hotel room, provided you made no fuss about the extra charge for soap 
and towels." 15 As long as you can pay, he explains, full of the complacency 
of dollar culture, no other human considerations exist. "At the hotel I rang 
for women like you would ring for whiskey and soda," 18 he boasts once in 
a pipe-dream of riches, inebriated with the omnipotence of money and the 
yanqui Playboy's conviction that the foreigners do these things better. 

During his tenure as personnel manager for Western Union, Miller was 
happily placed to exercise a perfect combination of sexual and economic 

12 Henry Miller, Sexus (New York: Grove Press, 1965), p. 143. 

13 See Steven Marcus, The Other Victorians (New York: Basic Books, 1966). 

14 Henry Miller, The World of Sex (New York: Grove Press, 1965), p. 101. 
10 Ibid., pp. 1 01-2. 

la Henry Miller, Tropic of Capricorn (New York: Grove Press, 1 961), p. 202. 



HENRY MILLER 



299 



power over the women applying to him for jobs: "The game was to keep 
them on the string, to promise them a job but to get a free fuck first. Usually 
it was only necessary to throw a feed into them, in order to bring them back 
to the office at night and lay them out on the zinc-covered table in the 
dressing room." 17 As all Americans know, the commercial world is a battle- 
field. When executives are "fucked" by the company, they can retaliate by 
"fucking" their secretaries. Miller's is "part-nigger" and "so damned pleased 
to have someone fuck her without blushing," 18 that she can be shared out 
to the boss's pal Curley. She commits suicide eventually, but in business, "it's 
fuck or be fucked," 19 Miller observes, providing some splendid insight into 
the many meanings we attach to the word. 

One memorable example of sex as a war of attrition waged upon economic 
grounds is the fifteen-franc whore whom Miller and his friend Van Norden 
hire in the Paris night and from whom, despite their own utter lack of ap- 
petite and her exhaustion from hunger, it is still necessary to extort the 
price. 20 As sex, or rather "cunt," is not only merchandise but a monetary 
specie, Miller's adventures read like so many victories for sharp practice, 
carry the excitement of a full ledger, and operate on the flat premise that 
quantity is quality. As with any merchant whose sole concern is profit, the 
"goods" themselves grow dull and contemptible, and even the amassing of 
capital pales beside the power it becomes. So enervating is the addiction 
to sex that Miller and his friends frequently renounce it: "Just cunt Hen 
. . . just cunt," MacGregor sighs. 21 Van Norden is ashamed of his own 
obsessive weakness, glad to make do from time to time with an apple, cutting 
out the core and adding cold cream. 22 Sensually or emotionally, such a sur- 
rogate involves no special hardship, since one has so little sense of actual 
women in Miller's accounts of intercourse. Apples, however, offer no resist- 
ance, and the enterprise of conquest, the fun of "breaking her down," is lost 
thereby. 23 

In the surfeit of Miller's perfervid "fucking," it is surprising how much of 
sexuality is actually omitted: intimacy, for example, or the aesthetic pleas- 
ures of nudity. A very occasional pair of "huge teats" or "haunches" arc poor 
and infrequent spare parts for the missing erotic form of woman. Save for 
the genitals— the star performers cock and balls— not a word is wasted on 
the male body. It is not even bodies who copulate here, let alone persons. 
Miller's fantasy drama is sternly restricted to the dissociated adventures of 
cunt and prick: "The body is hers, but the cunt's yours. The cunt and the 

17 Ibid., p. 29. 

18 Ibid., p. 57, p. 180. 

19 Ibid., p. 30. This is the sense of the passage. 

2,1 Henry Miller, Tropic of Cancer (New York: Grove Press, 1961), p. 141 ff. 
21 Henry Miller, Plexus (New York: Grove Press, 19653, P- 475- 
2 ~ Miller, Tropic of Cancer, pp. 291-92. 

23 Henry Miller, Nexus (New York: Grove Press, 1965), p. 275 and passim. The 
expression is used often in this book and elsewhere. 



3oo 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



prick, they're married," he lectures, after having demonstrated how life has 
so divorced the couple that "the bodies are going different ways." 24 In so 
stipulating on a contingent and momentary union, Miller has succeeded in 
isolating sexuality from the rest of life to an appalling degree. Its partici- 
pants take on the idiot kinetics of machinery— piston and valve. 

The perfect Miller "fuck" is a biological event between organs, its hall- 
mark-its utter impersonality. Of course perfect strangers are best, chance 
passengers on subways molested without the exchange of word or signal. 
Paradoxically, this attempt to so isolate sex only loads the act with the most 
negative connotations. Miller has gone beyond even the empty situations one 
frequently encounters in professional pornography, blue movies, etc., to 
freight his incidents with cruelty and contempt. While seeming to remove 
sexuality from any social or personal context into the gray abstraction of 
"organ grinding." 25 he carefully includes just enough information on the 
victim to make her activity humiliating and degrading, and his own an as- 
sertion of sadistic will. 

Miller boasts, perhaps one should say confesses, that the "best fuck" he 
"ever had" was with a creature nearly devoid of sense, the "simpleton" who 
lived upstairs. 20 "Everything was anonymous and unformulated . . , Above 
the belt, as I say, she was batty. Yes, absolutely cuckoo, though still aboard 
and afloat. Perhaps that was what made her cunt so marvelously impersonal. 
It was one cunt out of a million . . . Meeting her in the daytime, watching 
her slowly going daft, it was like trapping a weasel when night came on. 
All I had to do was to lie down in the dark with my fly open and wait." 27 
Throughout the description one not only observes a vulgar opportunistic use 
of Lawrence's hocus pocus about blanking out in the mind in order to at- 
tain "blood consciousness," but one also intuits how both versions of the 
idea are haunted by a pathological fear of having to deal with another and 
complete human personality. Happily, Miller's "pecker" is sufficient to "mes- 
merize" his prey in the dark: "Come here, you bitch," I kept saying to my- 
self, "come in here and spread that cunt over me ... I didn't say a word, I 
didn't make a move, I just kept my mind riveted on her cunt moving quietly 
in the dark like a crab." 28 One is made very aware here that in the au- 
thor's scheme the male is represented not only by his telepathic instrument, 
but by mind, whereas the perfect female is a floating metonymy, pure cunt, 
completely unsullied by human mentality. 

Things are not always this good. To achieve a properly "impersonal fuck" 
with his despised wife Maude (she persists in the folly of "carnal love" 

24 Sexus, p. 83. 

25 Steven Marcus attributes this happy expression to Philip Rahv, 

26 Henry Miller, Tropic of Capricorn, pp. 1 8 1-82. 
^ Ibid., -p. 183. 



HENRY MILLER 



301 



in opposition to her husband's wiser taste for "cold fuck") Miller is put to 
the trouble of waiting until she sleeps: "Get her half asleep, her blinders 
off 29 . . . sneak up on her, slip it to her while she's dreaming." 80 The 
method recommended here is "back-scuttling," preferable for eliminating 
all superfluous contact and never obliging him to look at her face. Not until 
his betrayal and imminent departure madden her with grief and fear will she 
drop her annoying habit (the cause of their incompatibility) of desiring he 
recognize her as a person, and settle for being a "blind fuck." Earlier she 
had the gall to protest, "You never had any respect for me— as a human 
being," 81 but finally, in a repetitious series of scenes, Miller can play upon 
her hysteria, put her on the "fucking block" and go at it "with cold-blooded 
fury." 82 After that it's all "fast, clean work ... no tears, no love business" 
until the "ax" falls— a quaint trope which presumably represents his orgasm 
and her execution. 

During a really busy day (Maude, Valeska, Valeska's cousin), Miller awak- 
ens from a nap on a West Side pier to discover he has an erection. One must 
not let such providence go to waste so he hurries to the apartment of a young 
woman to whom he had been introduced that day at lunch. She opens the 
door half-asleep and Miller seizes his opportunity: "I unbuttoned my fly and 
got my pecker out and into position. She was so drugged with sleep that it 
was almost like working on an automaton." 33 So much the better. More 
attractive still is the exotic detail, an infringement of several taboos, that she 
is Jewish passing for Egyptian: "I kept saying to myself— 'an Egyptian fuck 
... an Egyptian fuck' ... It was one of the most wonderful fucks I ever had 
in my life." 84 Best of all, he manages to escape from her apartment fast 
enough to avoid the expense of any communication. This is really something 
for nothing, a free fuck: "I hadn't a word to say to her; the only thought in 
my head to get out . . . without wasting any words." 86 To complete his 
satisfaction, Miller's old friend Kronsky has arrived at the door of the apart- 
ment, and standing silently outside, is overhearing the entire scene, a crest- 
fallen witness to the conquest 



Miller's ideal woman is a whore. Lawrence regarded prostitution as a 
profanation of the temple, but with Miller the commercialization of sexuality 
is not only a gratifying convenience for the male (since it is easier to pay 
than persuade) but the perfection of feminine existence, efficiently confining 
it to the function of absolute cunt. To illustrate this he calls upon Germaine, 

29 Sexus, p. 83. 

81 Ibid., p. 97. 

sz Ibid., p. 100. 

83 Tropic of Capricorn, p. 82. 

»* Ibid., p. 83. 

85 Ibid., pp. 83-84. 




302 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



the archetypal French prostitute of American tourism: "a whore from the 
cradle; she was thoroughly satisfied with her role, enjoyed it in fact." 38 
Launching into a thorough exposition of the subject, Miller explains that 
Germaine's "twat" is her "glory," her "sense of connection," her "sense of life" 
because "that was the only place where she experienced any life . . , down 
there between her legs where women ought to." 3T "Germaine had the right 
idea: she was ignorant and lusty, she put her heart and soul into her work, 
She was a whore all the way through— and that was her virtue." 38 Miller 
states categorically, "I could no more think of loving Germaine than I could 
think of loving a spider," but he does wish to impress upon us her superiority 
to another prostitute, Claude, whom he castigates as "delicate" and blames 
her for "refinement," claiming she offends in having "a soul and a con- 
science." 30 Most unedifying of all, Claude's evident but unspoken grief is 
proof she fails to relish her life and even dislikes its active hustle after custom. 
Such an attitude is inappropriate, morally and aesthetically outrageous: "a 
whore, it seemed to me, had no right to be sitting there like a lady, waiting 
. . ¦ for someone to approach." 40 

Since "whores are whores," Miller is also capable of reviling them as 
"vultures," "buzzards," "rapacious devils," and "bitches"— his righteous scorn 
as trite as his sentimentality. He is anxious, however, to elevate their function 
to an "idea"— the Life Force. As with electrical conductors, to plug into them 
gives a fellow "that circuit which makes one feel the earth under his legs 
again," 41 Prostitutes themselves speak of their work as "servicing," and 
Miller's gratified egotism would not only seek to surround the recharge with 
mystification, but convert the whore into a curious vessel of intermasculine 
communication— rhapsodizing: "All the men she's been with and now you 
. . . the whole damned current of life flowing through you, through her, 
through all the guys behind you and after you." 42 What is striking here is 
not only the total abstraction Miller makes of sexuality (what could be less 
solid, less plastic than electricity?) but also the peculiar (yet hardly uncom- 
mon) thought of hunting other men's semen in the vagina of a whore, the 
random conduit of this brotherly vitality. 

There is a men's-house atmosphere in Miller's work. His boyhood chums 
remain the friends of his youth, his maturity, even his old age. Johnny Paul 
and the street-gang heroes of adolescence continue as the idols of adulthood, 
strange companions for Miller's literary gods: Spengler, Nietzsche, Dostoiev- 

36 Tropic of Cancer, p. 45. 

37 Ibid., pp. 45 and 47. 
38 I{n"d., p. 47. 

39 Ibid., pp. 44 and 46. 
*°Ihid., p. 46. 
41 Ibid., p. 47. 
« Ibid., p. 46. 



HENRY MILLER 



303 



ski. The six volumes of autobiography, and even the essays, are one endless, 
frequently self-pitying threnody for the lost paradise of his youth. 

As a result, the sexual attitudes of the "undisputed monarch" of the "Land 
of Fuck," 43 as Miller chooses to call himself, are those of an arrested adoles- 
cence where sex is clandestine, difficult to come by, 44 each experience con- 
stituting a victory of masculine diligence and wit over females either 
stupidly compliant or sagely unco-operative. There's one girl on the block 
who will take on the whole boy's club, but most are mean numbers who 
require working over; "good girls" whom parents and religion have corrupted 
into tough lays. The first afford the easy exultation of superiority, a feeling 
of utter and absolute contempt, the second, harder to make, provoke the 
animosity always reserved for the intransigent. The more difficult the assault 
the greater the glory, but any victory is poindess if it cannot be boasted of 
and sniggered over. Just as Kronsky is said to hover behind the door, the 
reader is given the impression that sex is no good unless duly observed and 
applauded by an ubiquitous peer-group jury. And so Miller's prose has al- 
ways the flavor of speech, the inflection of telling the boys: "And then I had 
to get over her again and shove it in, up to the hilt. She squirmed around like 
an eel, so help me God." 45 His strenuous heterosexuality depends, to a con- 
siderable degree, on a homosexual sharing. Not without reason, his love 
story, The Rosy Crucifixion, is one long exegesis of the simple admission "I 
had lost the power to love," 49 All the sentiment of his being, meanly with- 
held from "cunt," is lavished on the unattractive souls who make up the gang 
Miller never outgrew or deserted. What we observe in his work is a com- 
pulsive heterosexual activity in sharp distinction (but not opposed to) the 
kind of cultural homosexuality which has ruled that love, friendship, affec- 
tion—all forms of companionship, emotional or intellectual— are restricted 
exclusively to males. 

Miller's sexual humor is the humor of the men's house, more specifically, 
the men's room. Like the humor of any in-group, it depends on a whole 
series of shared assumptions, attitudes and responses, which constitute bonds 
in themselves. Here sex is a game whose pleasures lie in a demanding strategic 
deception and manipulation of a dupe. Its object is less the satisfaction of 
libido than ego, for the joys of sense are largely forgotten in the fun of 
making a fool of the victim. But unless sex is hard to get, comic, secretive, 
and "cunt" transparently stupid and contemptible, the joke disappears in air. 
As with racist humor or bigot fun in general, failure to agree upon the 

43 TJie World of Sex, p. 114. 

44 It is important to beat in mind that Miller was fifty-eight when Sexus was published. 
The scarcity ethic of callow youth— "Did you get to first base?" "Did you get her to go 
all the way?"— probably accounts for the sheer quantity, the cloying plenty of Miller's 
escapades. 

* 8 Tropic of Capricorn, p. 214. 

4 * Nexus, p. 37. 



3°4 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



presumed fundamentals turns the comedy into puerile tedium. The point of 
Miller's game is to get as much as you can while giving nothing. The "much" 
in question is not sexual experience, for that might imply depth of feeling: 
the answer appears to be as much "cunt" or as many "cunts" as possible. 
In standard English the approximate phrase is probably Kinsey's uninviting 
"number of sexual outlets." 

To love is to lose. In his one honest book, Nexus, Miller reveals that he 
lost very badly. His beloved Mara turned out to be a lesbian who inflicted 
her mistress upon him in a nightmarish manage a trois, a female variant of the 
rigged triangle Lawrence aspired to but never achieved. It would be fasci- 
nating to speculate on how much of Miller's arrogance toward "cunt" in gen- 
eral is the product of this one lacerating experience. 

For those convinced of the merits of the game, nearly any occasion can 
be exploited. Here is the redoubtable Henry paying a visit of condolence to 
a widow he once foolishly reverenced and admired, stammering and blushing 
before her, fatuously imagining she couldn't be "had." Scrupulously, he first 
sets the scene, welcoming his comrades to the setting of his triumph: "a low 
sofa," "soft lights"; the drink is catalogued and then the dress— "a beautiful 
low-cut morning gown." 47 Halfway through a eulogy of her late husband, 
Miller is suddenly inspired: "Without saying a word I raised her dress and 
slipped it into her." 48 The moment of truth is at hand; will the widow balk? 
As in a dream, this surprise attack meets with instantaneous success: "As I 
got it into her and began to work it around she took to moaning like . . , 
sort of delirious . . . with gasps and little shrieks of joy and anguish." 49 
Finally the moral : "I thought to myself what a sap you've been to wait so 
long. She was so wet and juicy down there . . . why, anybody could have 
come along and had what's what. She was a pushover." 50 So are they all, 
and the joke is that such opportunities are missed only for lack of enterprise 
or through adherence to false ideals. 

They are not only pushovers, they are puppets. Speaking boy to boy about 
another "fuck," Miller remarks, "I moved her around like one of those legless 
toys which illustrate the principle of gravity." 51 Total victory is gratuitous 
insult; the pleasure of humiliating the sexual object appears to be far more 
intoxicating than sex itself. Miller's prot£g6, Curley, is an expert at in- 
flicting this sort of punishment, in this instance, on a woman whom both 
men regard as criminally overambitious, disgracefully unaware she is only 
cunt: 

He took pleasure in degrading her. I could scarcely blame him for it, she was 
such a prim, priggish bitch in her street clothes. You'd swear she didn't own a 

47 Henry Miller, Black Spring (New York: Grove Press, 1963), p. 96. 

™ Ibid. 

™lbid. 

BO Ibid. 

D1 Sexus, p. 94. The legless toy in question is Mara. 



HENRY MILLER 



305 



cunt the way she carried herself in the street. Naturally, when he got her alone, 
he made her pay for her highfallutin' ways. He went at it cold-bloodedly. "Fish 
it out!" he'd say, opening his fly a little. "Fish it out with your tongue!" . . . 
once she got the taste of it in her mouth you could do anything with her. 
Sometimes he'd stand her on her hands and push her around the room that 
way, like a wheelbarrow. Or else he'd do it dog fashion, and while she groaned 
and squirmed he'd nonchalandy light a cigarette and blow the smoke between 
her legs. Once he played her a dirty trick doing it that way. He had worked her 
up to such a state that she was beside herself. Anyway, after he had almost 
polished the ass ofF her with his hack-scuttling he pulled out for a second, as 
though to cool his cock off . . . and shoved a big long carrot up her twat. 62 

One recalls Shapiro's enthusiasm for the "overpowering mysteries of love and 
copulation." 



Even the orgies which Miller presents to us as lessons in a free and happy 
sensuality, far removed from the constraints of American puritan ism, are 
really only authoritarian arrangements where male will is given absolute 
license. One of these events takes place at Ulric's studio. But the brilliant 
surface of the occasion is marred by the hero's cupidity in wishing to enjoy 
both women, though insanely anxious that Ulric stay away from his own 
Mara. Here, just as in legendary suburbia, the women take no active part in 
the arrangements whereby they are swapped. Usually Miller and his friends 
are magnanimous; they offer each other some "cunt" whenever they can, 
an offer casually made in front of the property herself. Several unforeseen 
occurrences trouble the moment's serenity. Ulric's "blind date," because mu- 
latto, is "rather difficult to handle, at least in the preliminary stages." 83 More- 
over, she begins to menstruate: "What's a little blood between bouts?" Ulric 
giggles, alarmed enough to rush to the bathroom and scrub himself "assidu- 
ously," unable to cover a primitive fright which infects the whole gang — 
Miller himself takes twenty pages to fret over the possibility that contact 
with menstrual discharge has given him "the syph." In their omnipotence, 
Miller and his cohorts can do anything to women whose only revenge is 
venereal disease— a major reason for the continual masculine anxiety on this 
score. 

Another group event takes place between Miller, his estranged wife 
Maude, and a visitor who stopped in for a drink. On this occasion things 
begin amiably enough, Miller providing an ecstatic running commentary 
on the ideal freedom from jealousy, ill will, and guilt, and each of the two 

62 Tropic of Capricorn, pp. n 80-81. 

03 Sexus, p. 91. Miller has a certain faltering sympathy for blacks which does not ex- 
tend itself to black women about whom he makes remarks so outrageously racist that 
(as expressions of the author's own sentiment) they are difficult to match in serious 
writing. "Try a piece o£ dark meat now and then. It's tastier, and it costs less," etc. 
(.Nextts, p. 261]). 



306 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



female robots behaving splendidly. Finally the hero, tried by the exertion 
of some five consecutive orgasms, summons his last ounce of strength for 
neighbor Elsie, who has been most enthusiastic till now: "'Go on, f uc k 
fuck,' she cried," etc. 5,1 Suddenly the evening's pleasant ambiance is shat- 
tered and Elsie is in pain. Miller's powerful prose renders this '"Oh, oh! 
Don't. Please don't. It hurts!' she yelled." 55 The hero is outraged. He appears 
to reason that, in consenting, the woman had waived all rights and must be 
kept to the bargain regardless: 

"Shut up, you bitch you!" I said. "It hurts does it? You wanted it, didn't you?" I 
held her tighdy, raised myself a little higher to get it into the hilt, and pushed 
until I thought her womb would give way. Then I came— right into that snail- 
like mouth which was wide open. She went into a convulsion, delirious with 
joy and pain. Then her legs slid off my shoulders and fell to the floor with a 
thud. She lay there like a dead one, completely fucked out." 58 

The spirit of this sort of evening is incomprehensible, both in its frenzy 
and in its violence, unless one takes into account the full power of the con- 
ventional morality it is written against and depends upon so parasitically— 
every fear, shame, and thou shalt not. Were there not so much to deny, resist, 
overcome, and befoul, the operator and his feminine machines would hardly 
require their belabored promiscuity, nor the hero his righteous brutality. 

Miller is very far from having escaped his Puritan origin: it is in the smut 
of his pals; in the frenzy of his partners; in the violence and contempt of his 
"fucking." We are never allowed to forget that this is forbidden and the 
sweeter for being so; that lust has greater excitements than love; that women 
degrade themselves by participation in sexuality, and that all but a few 
"pure" ones are no more than cunt and outrageous if they forget it. "The 
dirty bitches— they like it," he apprises us; clinical, fastidious, horrified and 
amused to record how one responded "squealing like a pig"; another "like a 
crazed animal"; one "gibbered"; another "crouched on all fours like a she- 
animal, quivering and whinnying"; while still another specimen was "so deep 
in heat" she was like "a bright voracious animal ... an elephant walking 
the ball."" 

The very brutality with which he handles the language of sex; the 
iconographic four-letter words, soiled by centuries of prurience and 
shame, is an indication of Miller's certainty of how really filthy all this is. 
His defense against censorship is incontrovertible— "there was no other idiom 
possible" to express the "obscenity" he wished to convey. 68 His diction is, 

" Ibid., p. 384. 
65 Ibid. 
™lbid. 

57 Chosen at random: see Sexus, p. 227, Capricorn, p. 213, and Sextts, p. 101, and 
377 and 378. 

B8 Henry Miller, Remember to Remember (New York: New Directions, 1947), p. 280, 



HENRY MILLER 



307 



quite as he claims, a "technical device" 69 depending on the associations of dirt, 
violence, and scorn, in which a sexually distressed culture has steeped the 
words which also denominate the sexual organs and the sexual act. Miller 
is completely opposed to dissipating the extrasexual connotations of such 
diction, but wishes to preserve its force as "magical terms" 00 whose power 
is immanent in their quality of mana and taboo. Under this sacramental 
cloak a truly obscene ruthlessness toward other human beings is passed over 
unnoticed, or even defended. "Obscenity" is analogous to the "uses of the 
miraculous in the Masters," Miller announces pretentiously, 61 He and the 
censor have linguistic and sexual attitudes in common: ritual use of the 
"obscene" is, of course, pointless, unless agreement exists that the sexual is, in 
fact, obscene. 02 Furthermore, as Miller reminds us again and again, obscen- 
ity is a form of violence, a manner of conveying male hostility, both toward 
the female (who is sex) and toward sexuality itself (which is her fault). Yet, 
for all his disgust, indeed because of it, Miller must return over and over to 
the ordure; steel himself again and again by confronting what his own 
imagination (powerfully assisted by his cultural heritage and experience) has 
made horrible. The egotism called manhood requires such proof of courage. 
This is reality, Miller would persuade us: cunt stinks, as Curley says, and 
cunt is sex. 

With regard to the male anatomy, things are very different, since "prick" 
is power. While urinating in a pissoir or even emptying the garbage, Miller 
may be smitten with a painful awareness of his own noble destiny. In the 
"Land of Fuck" the "spermatozoon reigns supreme." God is the "summation 
of all the spermatozoa." Miller himself is divine: "My name? Why just call 
me God." 63 Actually, he's even a bit more than this— "something beyond God 
Almighty. ... I am a man. That seems to me sufficient." 04 Probably, but 
just in case, it is safer to develop a theology and know one's catechism: "Be- 
fore me always the image of the body, our triune god of penis and testicles. 
On the right, God the Father; on the left and hanging a little lower, God 
the Son! and between them and above them, the Holy Ghost. I can never 
forget that this holy trinity is man-made." 03 

Cunt is scarcely this inspiring: a "crack"; a "gash"; a "wound"; a "slimy 



se Ibid., p. 287. 
e° Ibid., p. 288. 
« Ibid., p. 287. 

62 Unfortunately for the religiously inclined of every persuasion, from Miller to the 
censors to the Church, fuck is losing its aura of the nefarious and in time may, while 
meaning all things to all people, mean just what it does mean and cease to function 
as a synonym for hurt, humble, or exploit. In Eros Denied Wayland Young has already 
demonstrated that it is surely the best English word to convey "sexual intercourse," 
"coitus," and other pretentious locutions to which expository prose is still confined. 

63 Tropic of Capricorn, pp. 203-4. 

64 Black Spring, p. 24. Italics Miller's. 

65 Ibid., pp. 24-25. 



3 o8 SEXUAL POLITICS 

hole";— but really only emptiness, nothingness, zero. This is no less true of 
Mara than of the run-of-the-mill female, the taxi-dancer Miller dismisses as a 
"minus sign" of "absolute vacuity," 86 Gazing at his love, the egoist reports he 
"finds nothing, nothing except my own image wavering in a bottomless well," 
admitting at last he is "unable to form the slightest image of her being." w 
In the Tropic of Cancer both Miller and Van Norden explore the frighten- 
ing enigma of "cunt." Sickened, even before he begins, by the very sight of 
this "dead clam," Van Norden fortifies himself with technology: "I made her 
hold it open and I trained the flashlight on it ... I never in my life looked 
at cunt so seriously . . . And the more I looked at it the less interesting it 
became. It only goes to show you there's nothing to it after all." 68 Still shaken 
at the sight, he cannot help exclaiming over the bitter cheat: 

When you look at them with their clothes on you imagine all sorts of things; 
you give them an individuality like, which they haven't got, of course. There's 
just a crack there between the legs . . . It's an illusion! . . . It's so absolutely 
meaningless . . . All that mystery about sex and then you discover that it's 
nothing— just a blank . . . there's nothing there . . . nothing at all. It's dis- 
gusting. 09 

Later on in the book Miller hires a whore himself to have a try at dredging 
some meaning out of the unfathomable vacuum of the female. Like his 
fellow investigator, he finds only a "great gulf of nothingness," an "ugly 
gash" and "the wound that never heals." 70 But he is determined to do better 
than his buddy. He is also extremely self-conscious about the artist's lofty 
role in the areas of myth and vision. It is not very far from this to "mystery;" 
so, doing the best he can, Miller converts the "fucked out cunt of a whore" 
into a grand "riddle," hoping to convince himself that the planet earth is 
"but a great sprawling female ... in the violet light of the stars." After all, 
he reasons, "out of that dark unstitched wound, that sink of abomination," 
man is bom; part clown; part angel, a thought which leaves him "face to 
face with the Absolute." And out of this unworthy "zero" derive the "endless 
mathematical worlds" of masculine civilization, even the holy writ of Dostoi- 
evsky There must, therefore, be something to this "festering obscene horror" 
after all. 71 A false Xavier touching leprosy on a dare, Miller finds it impos- 
sible to smother his disgust. There is perhaps a certain unintended irony 
too, in the fact that Mara, his apotheosis of the eternal and mysterious 
"female principle," is also a pathological liar. 

68 Tropic of Capricorn, pp. 120-21. 

Wlbid., p. 343. 

eB Tropic of Cancer, pp. 139-40. 

99 Ibid., p. 140. 

*° Ibid., p. 249, 

™ Ibid., pp. 248, 9, 50. 



HENRY MILLER 



309 



Miller has a rather morbid fear of excreta. The only woman whom he 
actually fails to "fuck" lived in an apartment with a faulty toilet and, in some 
two-thousand pages, his "most embarrassing moment" (to adopt his own in- 
teresting phrase) occurred when it overflowed, a generous amount of his 
feces along with it. Miller abandons the siege and ducks out, leaving her in 
charge of his remains. In general, he has irreversibly associated sexuality with 
the process of waste and elimination, and since his responses to the latter are 
extraordinarily negative, it is significant that, when he intends to be particu- 
larly insulting, he carries on his amours in the "shithouse" as, on one occasion, 
when he happens upon "an American cunt" in a French rest-room. Standing 
her "slap up against the wall, he finds he can't "get it into her." With his 
never-failing ingenuity, he next tries sitting on the toilet seat. This won't do 
either, so, in a burst of hostility posing as passion, he reports: "I come all over 
her beautiful gown and she's sore as hell about it." 72 In the Tropic of Capri- 
corn he repeats the stunt; in Sexus too. It is a performance which nicely 
combines defecation with orgasm and clarifies the sense of defilement in 
sexuality which is the puritan bedrock of Miller's response to women. The 
unconscious logic appears to be that, since sex defiles the female, females 
who consent to sexuality deserve to be defiled as completely as possible. 78 
What he really wants to do is shit on her. 

The men's room has schooled Miller in the belief that sex is inescapably 
dirty. Meditating there upon some graffiti, "the walls crowded with sketches 
and epithets, all of them jocosely obscene," he speculates on "what an im- 
pression it would make on those swell dames ... I wondered if they would 
carry their tails so high if they could see what was thought of an ass here." 74 
Since his mission is to inform "cunt" just how it's ridiculed and despised 
in the men's house, women perhaps owe Miller some gratitude for letting 
them know. 



In a great many respects Miller is avant-garde and a highly inventive artist, 
but his most original contribution to sexual attitudes is confined to giving 
the first full expression to an ancient sentiment of contempt. The remainder 
of his sexual ethos is remarkably conventional. Reading, again in the toilet, 
he converts his own syndrome into a "great tradition" and fancies himself 
one of the illustrious company of Rabelais, Boccaccio, and Petronius, "the fine 
lusty genuine spirits who recognized dung for dung and angels for angels," 
observing with them the ancient distinctions between good and evil, whore 
and lady, adamant about the virtues of a "world where the vagina is repre- 

rai&«L J p.i8. 

73 E.g. Women are dirty because they are sex; "pure" women are those who deny 
this. Some few of these are admirable ([mothers, childhood sweethearts, etc.); most, how- 
ever, are only hypocrites to be punished and exposed. 

74 Tropic of Cancer, pp. 1 74-75. 




3io 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



sented by a crude, honest slit." 78 Under the brash American novelty is the 
old story: guilt, fear, a reverence for "purity" in the female; and a deep moral 
outrage whenever the "lascivious bitch" in woman is exposed. Despite the 
fact that Don Juan's success lies in proving "they all like it— the dirty 
bitches," Miller seems each time disappointed that they should, shocked and 
unsettled by the discovery. Somehow he wishes they wouldn't, is sure they 
shouldn't. Yet, most do and it appears that it is just to unmask this very 
hypocrisy that he carries on so many campaigns. Disillusion sets in early. 
Giving piano lessons, the stripling discovered that his pupil's mother is "a 
slut, a tramp and a trollop if ever there was one." Worse still, she lives 
"with a nigger . . . seems she couldn't get a prick big enough to satisfy her." 
Now the first rule of his code is that no opportunity should be wasted— any- 
way, "what the hell are you going to do when a hot bitch like that plasters 
her cunt up against you"— yet Miller seems shocked nevertheless. 76 He has 
a hygienic preference for the daughter, who is "fresh cunt," clean as "new- 
mown hay." When she is "knocked up" he finds a "Jewboy," coughs up a very 
modest contribution toward the cost of an abortion and lights out for the 
Adirondacks. Off on a jaunt to the Catskills he meets a pair of girls who, 
in the manner of medieval "types," represent Dishonesty and Integrity. Agnes 
is a "dumb Irish Catholic" and consequently, a prude; she 'likes it," but is 
afraid to admit as much. In splendid contrast stands Francie— "one of those 
girls who are born to fuck. She had no aims, no great desires . . . held no 
grievances, was constantly cheerful." 77 She is so exemplary she even relishes 
a beating: "it makes me feel good inside . . . maybe a woman ought to get 
beaten up once in a while," she volunteers, and Miller marvels that "It isn't 
often you get a cunt who'll admit such things— I mean a regular cunt and 
not a moron." 78 

In the experience of the American manchild sex and violence, exploita- 
tion and sentimentality, are strangely, even wonderfully, intermingled. 
Miller relates how, on one climactic day of his childhood, he murdered a boy 
in a gang fight, then slicked his hair and returned to the welcoming arms of 
unsuspecting Aunt Caroline, to bask in the maternal solicitude of her home- 
made bread— "Mothers had time in those days to make good bread with their 
own hands, and still do the thousand and one things which motherhood de- 
mands of a woman." 79 The same afternoon brings sexual initiation: "Joey 
was so happy that he took us down to his cellar later and made his sister 
pull up her dress and show what was underneath . . .Whereas the other 

76 Block Spring, pp. 48, 50. 

76 Tropic of Capricorn, pp. 155-56. 

77 Ibid., p. 261. 
™lbid., p. 163. 

79 Remember to Remember (New York: New Directions, 1947), p. 40. The homily, 
delivered with absolute gravity, echoed by (and echoing) popular magazines, soap opera, 
etc., is an object lesson in how interrelated the various levels of American media can be. 



HENRY MILLER 



3" 



urchins used to pay to make Weesie lift her dress up, for us it was done with 
love. After a while we persuaded her not to do it anymore for the other boys 
-we were in love with her and we wanted her to go straight." 80 The model 
of the adult world already shines through the boy's excitement: violence, a 
male prerogative; sexuality, a secret and shameful province of the female, 
regulated by the cash nexus. And the pieties are neatly arranged: Weesie 
shall be saved and isolated into "decency" through "love" will mellow in 
time into Aunt Caroline's handy ignorant nurturance. 

Through all his exhausting experiences with enthusiastic "bitches, Miller 
never abandons the icons of his "pure," early loves, immaculate creatures 
about whom, he is pleased to announce, he "never had an impure thought.' 
Four decades later his chivalrous ardor toward Una Gifford can still gush 
forth at the remembered echo of a pop tune: "... a thousand times beyond 
any reach of mine. Kiss me, kiss me again!" How the words pierced me! And 
not a soul in that boisterous, merrymaking group was aware of my agony 
. . . Sounds of revelry filled the empty street ... It was for me they were 
giving the party. And she was there, my beloved, snow-blonde, starry-eyed, 
forever unattainable Queen of the Arctic." 81 Miller, in love, reverts to all 
the sentimental tokens of "respect" appropriate to a Victorian suitor. Floun- 
dering in a sentimentality largely narcissistic, full of a sludgy "idealism 
that complements his cynicism, he sends flowers and writes long letters full 
of regressive daydreams. Rich in pathos as it is, Miller's long, frustrating at- 
tachment to Mara is less a love story than the case history of a neurotic 
dependence. 

Part of Miller's conventionality is to insist on a rigid split between body 
and mind, sense and soul. Van Norden puts it on the line: "You can get 
something out of a book, even a bad book . . but a cunt, it's just sheer loss 
of time." 82 Miller has plenty of time to waste but is just as careful to pre- 
serve an obstinate separation between sex and the "higher" life of books 
and ideas, which can only be experienced alone or in masculine company. 
His interpretation of the separate spheres is that woman is no more than 
"cunt," though she is occasionally said to redeem herself by having babies 
while men write books. Even this uterine mystique is no good unless an ab- 
straction; he has no interest in parenthood, and his compliments to maternity 
are scanty and without feeling. 

Ambivalent about money, Miller is unmoved by the claims of extreme 
virility, war, and militarism. Yet this hardly makes him any less determined to 
maintain male hegemony throughout every phase of life. As Lawrence and 
other prophets have tried to teach us, this can only be done by preserving 
traditional sexual polarity, the one way to offset the decline of the West and 

80 Tropic of Capricorn, p. 125. 

81 Nexus, p. 303. 

82 Tropic of Cancer, p. 140. 



3« 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



redeem the honors of the twentieth century. In what must be, beyond ques- 
tion, the most novel analysis of World War I, Miller traces the catastrophe to 
the loss of sexual polarity, e.g., the feminist movement: "The loss of sex polar- 
ity is part and parcel of the larger disintegration, the reflex of the soul's death, 
and coincident with the disappearance of great men, great causes, great 
wars." 83 

Miller's scheme of sexual polarity relegates the female to "cunt," an ex- 
clusively sexual being, crudely biological. Though he shares this lower na- 
ture, the male is also capable of culture and intellect. The sexes are two war- 
ring camps between whom understanding is impossible since one is human 
and animal (according to Miller's perception, intellectual and sexual)— the 
other, simply animal. Together, as mind and matter, male and female, they 
encompass the breadth of possible experience. The male, part angel, part ani- 
mal, enjoys yet suffers too from his divided nature. His appetite for "cunt," 
recurrent and shameful as it is, is, nevertheless, his way of staying in touch 
with his animal origins. It keeps him "real." Miller staves off the threat of an 
actual sexual revolution— woman's transcendence of the mindless material 
capacity he would assign her— through the flat of declaring her cunt and 
trafficking with her only in the Utopian fantasies of his "fucks." That this is 
but whistling in the dark is demonstrated by his own defeating experience 
with Mara, and, even more persuasively by the paralyzing fear which drives 
him to pretend— so that he may deal with them at all— that women are 
things. 84 

In The World of Sex Miller explains that most of his writing on sex was 
simply an attempt at "self-liberation." 85 What he has furnished us is an ex- 
cellent guide to his dungeon but it provides no clue to the world into which 
he was emancipated. Delivered from the Brahmin eminence of his old age, 
the following pronunciamento is woefully shaky: "Perhaps a cunt, smelly 
though it may be, is one of the prime symbols for the connection between all 
things" 80 — the possibility might exist, but the stench you may be sure of. 
There are times when Miller seems to catch a glimpse of what chaos is made 
of human life through the brutality of the sexual ethic he represents: and at 
one point, profoundly unconscious of patronization, he serves up this stagger- 
ing naivete: "No matter how attached I became to a 'cunt,' I was more 
interested in the person who owned it. A cunt doesn't live a separate inde- 
pendent existence." 87 

The impulse to see even women as human beings may occur momentarily 
—a fleeting urge— but the terrible needs of adolescent narcissism are much 

83 Henry Miller, The Cosmological Eye (New York: New Directions, 1939), p. 120. 

84 Miller's respect for the work of Anaiis Nin appears to be the single exception to the 
rule, perhaps in itself a reason for his enthusiasm over het productions. 

8D The World of Sex, p. 16. This short essay veers between aspiring to be a "serious 
message" on the subject, and its more pressing need to sell the title. 
88 Ibid,., p. 44. 
87 Ibid. 



HENRY MILLER 



3i3 



greater, the cheap dream of endlessly fucking impersonal matter, mindless 
tissue endlessly compliant, is so much more compelling. And the thrills of 
egotism are always there: the high of the con game, the excitement of lying, 
wheedling, acting, cheating, deliberately degrading, then issuing orders and 
directing the gull in a performance whose "bestiality" only confirms his de- 
tached superiority. All these comforts make up for the disgust of the act 

itself. 

Finally, there is the satisfaction of evacuation— a general release of ten- 
sions, hostilities, frustrations, even thoughts. "During intercourse they passed 
out of me, as though I were emptying refuse in a sewer." 88 Americans never 
underestimate the virtues of indoor plumbing. Miller looks on woman in a 
surrealist dream and sees "a knot with a mask between her legs" and knows 
"one crack is as good as another and over every sewer there's a grating." 89 
"Cunt" may be lobotomized earthenware, but "behind every slit" 90 is danger, 
death, the unknown, the exhilarations of the chase, and in Miller's "genito- 
urinary" 91 system, the sexual comfort-station is a pay toilet whose expense is 
great enough to constitute its own reward. 

Miller has given voice to certain sentiments which masculine culture had 
long experienced but always rather carefully suppressed: the yearning to 
effect a complete depersonalization of woman into cunt, a game-sexuality of 
cheap exploitation, a childish fantasy of power untroubled by the reality of 
persons or the complexity of dealing with fellow human beings and, finally, 
a crude species of evacuation hardly better than anal in character. 

While the release of such inhibited emotion, however poisonous, is beyond 
question advantageous, the very expression of such lavish contempt and 
disgust, as Miller has unleashed and made fashionable, can come to be an 
end in itself, eventually harmful, perhaps even malignant. To provide un- 
limited scope for masculine aggression, although it may finally bring the 
situation out into the open, will hardly solve the dilemma of our sexual poli- 
tics. Miller does have something highly important to tell us; his virulent sex- 
ism is beyond question an honest contribution to social and psychological 
understanding which we can hardly afford to ignore. But to confuse this 
neurotic hostility, this frank abuse, with sanity, is pitiable. To confuse it with 
freedom were vicious, were it not so very sad. 

ss ibid., p. 51. 

86 Black Spring, p. 1 64. 

80 Ibid. 

81 Miller is fond of this term and uses it often. 



SEVEN 



U\(orman zJXCailer 



Mailer is paradoxical, full of ambivalence, divided conscience, and con- 
flicting loyalties. There is probably no other writer who can describe the 
present and its "practical working-day American schizophrenia" so well. 1 
For by now Mailer is as much a cultural phenomenon as a man of letters, 
fulfilling his enormous ambition to exert a direct effect on the consciousness 
of his time. What he offers for our edification is the spectacle of his dilemma, 
the plight of a man whose powerful intellectual comprehension of what is 
most dangerous in the masculine sensibility is exceeded only by his attach- 
ment to the malaise. No one has done so much to explain, yet justify violence. 
Mailer is enigmatic enough to be a militarist with quasi-pacifist books to his 
credit, a man compulsively given to casting himself into the role of the "gen- 
eral" leading "his troops" when invited to appear as a celebrity at anti-war 
demonstrations. 2 

A prisoner of the virility cult, Mailer is never incapable of analyzing it. 
He even furnishes persuasive argument as to how this psychological set de- 
mands our general concern. For it is here that sexual politics intersect with 

1 Norman Mailer, The Armies of the Night (New York: New American Library, 
1968, Signet reprint), p. 125. 

2 See Miami and The Siege of Chicago (New York: World, 1968) and The Armies 
of the Night, passim. 



NORMAN MAILER 



3i5 



realpolHik, Here the oppression of women as a group is invoked to provide 
an emotional model, even a style, for patriarchal warfare. When pushed very 
far, an oppressive system tends to become vicious. In Mailer's work the sexual 
animus behind reactionary attitude erupts into open hostility. It is hardly sur- 
prising that a man whose most formative adult experience took place in the 
men's-house culture of the army might tend to see sexual belligerence in the 
terms of actual warfare. 

When a novelist is obsessed with certain traits of behavior, his characters 
tend to repeat themselves from one book to the next. There is a character in 
Mailer's fiction who continues to appear under different guises, and according 
to the author's ambivalent response, may be villain or hero, or more likely 
villain as hero. The first such figure is Sergeant Croft of The Naked and The 
Dead, where the portrait seems to be as unfriendly as it is incisive. Like 
D.J., the prodigy ("there's blood on my dick") of Why Are We in Vietnam?, 3 
Croft began as a hunter. Like Sergius O'Shaugnessy of The Deer Park, 
Croft has "the cruelty to be a man." 4 

The larger part of Croft's existence is passed in homicidal rage. His first 
murder, the cold-blooded execution of a striker whom he dismisses as a "dog," 
left him with a memorable "excitement," 5 It is an exhilaration he spends the 
rest of his life recapturing, both in sexuality ("You're all a bunch of fuggin 
whores ... all a bunch of dogs . . . You're all deer to track"), 6 and in the 
organized slaughter of warfare: ("I hate the bastards . . . I'm gonna really 
get me a Jap)." 7 The Naked and The Dead describes the American campaign 
on "Anopopei" in the Philippines. Since the Japanese who hold the island 
are without supplies and close to starvation, the invasion ends as a "Jap hunt," 
a Croftian holiday. Preparing to shoot a prisoner, Croft anticipates "the quick 
lurching spasms of the body when the bullets would crash into it," 8 and the 
frisson which awaits him is the exact counterpart to what he knows of sexual 
experience. 

Mailer regards Croft as the megalomaniac ambition of the frontier with 
no further room to exercise itself. "His ancestors pushed and labored and 
strained, drove their oxen, sweated their women, and moved a thousand 
miles." But in Croft this force has turned into an exclusively destructive 
energy: 9 "He pushed and labored inside himself and smoldered with an end- 
less hatred," his "main cast of mind" a "superior contempt." 10 "He hated 

3 Norman Mailer, Why Are We in Vietnam? (New York: Putnam, 1967), p. 7. 

* Norman Mailer, The Deer Park (novel) (New York: Putnam, 1955), Berkeley 
reprint, p. 198. 

6 Norman Mailer, The Naked and The Dead (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Wins- 
ton, 1948), Signet reprint, p. 117. 

a lbid., p. 130. 

TJbid., p. 123. 

&lbid., p. j 53. 

9 Ibid., p. 130. 

i°lbid., p. 124. 



3 i6 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



weakness and loved practically nothing." 11 Croft's most withering insult is to 
castigate his subordinates as "a pack of goddam women." 12 While a youth 
learning to track his first game (game whom he conceives to be female, be- 
cause prey), he cursed himself with the same fury when his gun wavered 
before firing— "Jus' a little old woman." 13 

Another factor has contributed to Croft's maniacal anger— his wife's adul- 
tery: "It ended with him going to town alone, and taking a whore when he 
was drunk, beating her sometimes with a wordless choler." 14 Mailer suggests 
that it is the impetus of this sexual rage which has brought Croft to the Army 
and halfway round the world to vent his spleen on strangers. 

If Croft stands for run o£ the mill fascism in the novel, General Cummings, 
the refined sadist at the pinnacle of the class structure which Army hierarchy 
represents so saliendy, is the higher totalitarianism. He too considers killing 
sexual, and sexuality murderous. First a sample of Cummings the lover: 

He must subdue her, absorb her, rip her apart and consume her . . . [thinking] 
"I'll take you apart, I'll eat you, oh, I'll make you mine, you bitch." 15 

Next the general: 

the deep dark urges of man, the sacrifice on the hilltop, the churning lusts of 
night and sleep, weren't all of them contained in the shattering, screaming 
burst of a shell . . . the phallus-shell that rides through a shining vagina of 
steel . . , the curve of sexual excitement and discharge, which is after all the 
physical core of life. 19 

As sex is war, war is sexual. Can one deny "the physical core of life"? The 
connection between sex and violence appears not only as metaphor, but 
seems to express a conviction about the nature of both phenomena. 

A superficial reading might convince one that Mailer's brilliant anatomy 
of these two cancerous personalities is rendered without any traces of ad- 
miring or positive identification. But in the last chapters of the book a subde 
shift takes place in the treatment of Croft; a curious effort is made to per- 
suade the reader that he is not mad but heroic. The novel goes GI and spoils 
itself in cheap patriotism. 17 Years later Mailer not only admitted that his ideas 
about violence had "changed 180 degrees" since his first work, but even con- 

" Ibid. 

12 Ibid., p. 405. 

13 Ibid., p. 125. 
^lbid., p. 129. 

16 Ibid., pp. 325-26. 
10 Ibid., pp. 440-43. 

17 It is heartbreaking the way Mailer throws the book away on the last page by failing 
to stop at the proper moment, e.g., when the last Japanese is butchered- Instead he adds 
a final page of cute dugout humor which reduces the novel to a movie script- 



NORMAN MAILER 



317 



fided that "beneath the ideology of The Naked and The Dead was an ob- 
session with violence. The characters for whom I had the most secret 
admiration, like Croft," he remarks nonchalantly "were violent people." 18 

The ambiguity intrudes again in Barbary Shore, the quasi-political novel 
that followed, in which an undercurrent hostility continues to connect, even 
equate combat and cruelty with sexuality. In a book whose overt message is 
a shocked protest against the extermination camps of Nazi and Soviet, the 
brutality of our century, the hero and the novel's moral arbiter recalls with 
gratification how, as a soldier in enemy territory, he "made love from the 
hip;" 

I never saw the girl. Above my head in magnification of myself the barrel of 
the machine gun pointed toward the trees ... I went back to the hay and 
stretched out in a nervous half-sleep which consisted of love with artillery 
shells and sex of polished steel. 10 

Mailer's chief quarrel with Nazi genocide turns upon a point of style; he dis- 
approves of the technological nature of the gas chambers. Having promised 
Germany "the primitive secrets of her barbaric age," 20 having offered the 
thrill of a chance to "stomp on things and scream and shout and rip things 
up and kill," 21 Hitler paid off with nothing but the scientific tedium of gas. 

During the Hipster period of "The White Negro" and Advertisements for 
Myself Mailer seems to have thrown all hesitation aside, and while still har- 
boring reservations about the virtues of violence on a collective scale, appears 
to have fallen in love with it as a personal and sexual style. A rapist is a rapist 
only to the "square": to the superior perceptions of Hip, rape is "part of 
life," and should be assessed by a subtle critical method based on whether the 
act possesses "artistry" or "real desire." 22 Confusing the simply antisocial with 
the revolutionary, Mailer develops an aesthetic of Hip whose chief tempera- 
mental characteristic is a malign machismo, still dear to those in the New 
Left who have fallen under Mailer's spell in adolescence or continue to con- 
fuse Che Guevara with the brassy cliche of the Westerns. As the rampant 
individualism (domesticated Nietzsche) of Hip proliferates, it is interesting 
to observe the character Marion Faye change from the "homosexual villain" 
of The Deer Park into a banal movie satan in "Advertisements for Myself On 
the Way Out," achieving a final apotheosis in the theatrical production of 
The Deer Park in which Mailer travestied his novel. Faye is at first only a 

18 Norman Mailer, The Presidential Papers (New York: Putnam, 1963)^. 136. 

19 Norman Mailer, Barbary Shore (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1951), 
Signet reprint, pp. 1 14-1 5. 

20 The Presidential Papers, p. 182. 

21 Ibid., p. 134. 

22 Norman Mailer, Advertisements for Myself (New York: Putnam, r959), Berkeley 
reprint, p. 292. 



3i8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



sadistic pimp who goes about procuring "the kind of girl you could wipe 
your hands on." 28 But as the author's own admiring preoccupation with 
Faye's mastery of sex as manipulative power continues to grow, he invests this 
latter-day demon with an ambitious theological rigamarole, outfitting him with 
the glittery attributes of a cinema Faust and urban cowboy— Croft gone slick. 

The Deer Park began as a sympathetic and middling-good study of how a 
corrupt commercial artist, the director Charles Francis Eitel, picks up, exploits, 
then breaks and discards a woman who his snobbery fancies is his inferior. 
The structure, the moral logic and the aesthetic unity of the novel properly 
require that it end in Elena Esposito's suicide, the final achievement of Faye's 
sadistic powers of suggestion working upon the promising material of her 
own self-destructive descent into prostitution. The anticlimactic resolution 
Mailer chose to give the novel instead in the defeat of her empty marriage to 
Eitel has its own pathos. But the drastically different denouement imposed 
upon the stage version, with Eitel's sad, self-regarding death, devalues the 
work even more outrageously as Faye is transformed from a sleazy hood with 
demented notions of Sin, to a sexual Faust of Hip, and Eitel is promoted from 
a plausible Hollywood heel to a hero of love. 24 

In Tke Naked and The Dead Mailer had presented Croft with a foil named 
Lieutenant Hearne. A weak liberal, a university man, Hearne is engaged 
in a forlorn struggle against both the insidious enticements of the Cum- 
mings' way of life among the rich and powerful, whose heir apparent his 
class origins destine him to be, and the brutality of Croft whose officer and 
fighting equal he is finally so anxious to become— the last a folly which per- 
mits Croft to have him shot But in Steven Rojack, hero of An American 
Dream, the intellectual Heame does at last manage to become a Croft of 
civilian life whose most precious memory is the night his platoon cheered 
their young lieutenant's histrionic victory over a nest of German soldiers. 
Rojack has ever since been possessed of a rage which only murder can quell, 
and he manages to bring about the deaths of two white women and a black 
man all in the novel's thirty-two hours. Mrs. Rojack is snuffed out by a blow 
for male supremacy, Cherry by her lover's sentimentality, and Shago Martin 
so that the white man may keep a comer on "his woman" in the face of black 
encroachment. The novelist assures us meanwhile that "murder offers the 
promise of vast relief. It is never unsexual." 2 " In the sex war Mailer con- 
ducts throughout An American Dream, divorce is a "retreat," separation a 
species of cold war, sexual intercourse a "bang," or more explosively, a 
"bangeroo," male comrades are fellow "swords" and victory is announced in a 
froth-at-the-mouth Croftism: 

I felt a mean rage in my feet. It was as if in killing her, the act had been too 

^The Deer Park (novel), p. 159. 

24 Norman Mailer, The Deer Park, A Play (New York: Dial, 1967). 

2B Norman Mailer, An American Dream (New York: Dial, 1965), p. 8. 



NORMAN MAILER 



3'9 



gentle, I had not plumbed the hatred ... I had an impulse to go up to her and 
kick her ribs, grind my heel on her nose, drive the point of my shoe into her 
temple and kill her again, kill her good this time, kill her right. 1 stood there 
shuddering from the power of this desire . . . 2fl 

"Desire" is a happy verbal choice, for in the fantasy of virility which Mailer 
is so adept both at analyzing and at the same time identifying with in such 
a curious fashion, sexuality and violence are so inextricably mixed that the 
"desire to kill" is a phrase truly aphrodisiac. Nor is it very surprising that 
Rojack's victims should be women and blacks, or, with the exception of Ro- 
jack's service, the victims of Mailer's soldiers for three wars, Orientals: such 
are the white male's subjects, the objects of his dominant wrath. 

Mailer's latest study of the Wasp male psychosis, Why Are We in Viet- 
nam?, is perhaps his most interesting. It is carried out through the imagina- 
tion of an eighteen-year-old pondering the implications of his recent rite 
of passage into the murderous order of his peers. Hollingsworth, the evil 
genius of Barbary Shore, had first introduced the notion of sexuality as 
butchery: 



... he named various parts of her body and described what he would do to 
them, how he would tear this and squeeze that, eat here and spit there, butcher 
rough and slice fine, slash, macerate, pillage, all in an unrecognizable voice 
which must have issued between clenched teeth, until his appetite satisfied, 
I could see him squatting beside the carcass, his mouth wiped carefully with 
the back of his hand. With that, he sighed, as much as to say, "A good piece 
of ass, by God." 27 

Now the beguiling youth D. J. Jethroe, is introduced to tell us of the Alaskan 
bear hunt which has introduced him to "animal murder . . . and murder of 
the soldierest sort," 28 describing his initiation into the company of men in a 
Hip-Pop diction whose metaphor is sexual-military: "Now remember!" he 
instructs the reader before the killing begins, "Think of cunt and ass— so 
it's all clear." 29 To convince us that sex and violence are inextricable in the 
culture into which he is being welcomed as an adult, D.J. offers us the evi- 
dence of his senses: "ever notice how blood smells like cunt and ass all mix 
in one?" 30 Already perfectly at ease among the "sexual peculiarities of red- 
blooded men," at home with the hero "who can't come unless he's squinting 
down a gunsight," D.J. renders the intercourse of his patents in terms of an 
explosion. Using a "dynamite stick for a phallus," Big Daddy himself ("he 
don't come, he explodes, he's a geyser of love, hot piss, shit . . . he's Texas 

™lbid., p. 50. 

27 Barbary Shore, p. 146. 
2B Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 7. 

28 Ibid., p. 9. 
80 Ibid. 




3*° SEXUAL POLITICS 

willpower") mother Alice is scattered over the southern states, "they fou d 
her vagina in North Carolina and part of her gashole in hometown."" W t 
as D.J. fancies his penis a gun to "those Dallas debutantes and just plain 
common fucks who are lucky to get drilled by him," 32 he first gives in to the 
fever of the hunt when he catches sight of a great wounded bear splattering 
her death's blood into the forest The transition from hunting and sex to war 
itself is Mailer's interest in the novel. Corrupt as that "High Grade Asshole," 
his plastic executive father, whose propulsion to Icil] is a means of "getting it 
up,"*» DJ. now yearns after slaughter, inspired by an "itchy-dick memorv of 
electric red." 34 ^ 

So the case may be with Wasps and Texans. Mailer is neither of these 
There is a man in The Naked and The Dead whose name is Goldstein. He is 
not much of a soldier, he probably never killed anyone, but he does have the 
courage of fortitude and proves himself in an ordeal while carrying a friend's 
body through intolerable jungle miles of heat, thirst, and exhaustion. Oddly 
enough, this character never reappears in Mailer's fiction, 86 as hero after 
hero embody and then romanticize the Wasp viciousness of Croft or a mind- 
less brutality presented as Irish, while Mailer grows more and more like a 
pillar of the American Legion, rhapsodizing in bellicose euphoria over the 
"sport," the "sensuousness of combat," the "soft lift and awe and pleasure" 36 
of it; dilating upon the "sweetness" of war. 37 'Trust the authority of your 
senses," he admonishes with a veteran's nostalgia, conjuring by Hemingway 
through a busy career of aping the master's stolid martial airs-"If it made 
you feel good, it was good." 38 Perhaps, as an antidote to this enthusiasm, we 
may be permitted to quote another source: 

You 

Who have no channels for tears when you weep 

No lips through which words can issue when you howl 

No skin for your fingers to grip with when you writhe in torment 

You 

Your squirming limbs all smeared with blood and shining sweat and lymph 
Between your closed lids the glaring eyeballs show only a thread of white . . . 

In scorched and raw Hiroshima 
Out of dark shuddering flames 

sl Ibid., pp. 12-13. 
^Ibid., p. 42. 
Mlbid., p. 106. 
34 Ibid., p. 122. 

3B Sam Slovoda, the central character in Mailer's short story "The Man Who Studied 
Yoga (.Advertisements for Myself) might possibly be the single exception. 
36 Norman Mailer, Cannibals and Christians (New York: Dial, 1966), p. 112. 
MThe Armies of the Night, p. 107. 
wibid. 



NORMAN MAILER 321 

You no longer the human creatures you had been 

Scrambled and crawled one after the other 

Dragged yourselves along as far as this open ground 

To bury in the dusts of agony 

Your shriveled hair on scalps bald as the brows of Buddhist saints 39 

Mailer is at pains to convince us that the violence endemic in his novels 
and essays is in fact endemic in humanity, or at least that portion of it 
which merits his attention, since children, queers, and women fail to qual- 
ify and pacifists are "unmanly." 40 It follows that by definition the male 
is violent and for those blessed with this higher condition, "the message in 
the labyrinth of the genes would insist that violence was locked with crea- 
tivity"; 41 since it is "ineradicable," one stifles it "at one's peril" for it gives 
the holder "sufficient stature to claim he is a man." 42 

Moreover, the world of nature which D.J. and his still more manic pal 
Tex encounter in Alaska, the very "force of the North," with its sage "don't 
bullshit" air of reality, the essential environment of life itself, is one long 
lesson in violence where great prey upon small, male upon female. 43 Re- 
nouncing all technology in a parody of Faulkner's Bear, Tex and D.J. 
wander in the wilds and see all creatures speed toward death as a great 
male bear feeds upon a caribou doe, a fox upon mice, while the female 
herd is ruled by bulls designated as Fuck 1 and 2. 44 Under the burlesque of 
D.J.'s prose the ceremony is conducted with considerable seriousness. The 
outdated and ill-observed "Darwinism" of Mailer's glacier is presented to us 
as the true primitive mystery. In agreement with Lawrence, Mailer is anxious 
lest civilization "bury the primitive," believing that "what is at stake in the 
twentieth century" is "the peril that they will extinguish the animal in us." 45 
Not only is D.J.'s puberty ritual an inevitability by this standard, it is some- 
how to take on the glamour of the splendid and the dangerous because 
Mailer conducts it as classical pastiche, palming it off as immemorial wisdom. 
Even with a smirk on his face, D.J. fulfills the requirements of his test, 
joining the ranks of the Hemingway cult. Most important of all, he has 
avoided the traps of homosexuality, compassion, and effeminacy, and emerges 
from the cold white summit with the very "power" 40 of the mountain Croft 

30 Sankichi Toge, "At a First-Aid Post," from Tile Hiroshima Poems translated from 
the Japanese by James Kirkup and Fumiko Miura. Mailer can't abide poets who write 
about peace, they make him want to Bee the room. Toge is already dead of leukemia. 

M The Presidential Papers, p, 138. 

41 Ibid., p. 40. 

42 Ibid., pp. 21, 22, 23. 

43 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 57, 

44 Ibid., p. 191. 

45 The Presidential Papers, p. 200. 

48 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 157. 




322 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



was unworthy to climb. Like much pop art, the novel is so ambiguous so 
uncertain of itself, that it tends to endorse what it appears at first to parody. 

Then too, the young murderer's charm and wit, his self-proclaimed tal- 
ent— "a finger into the cunt of genius" 47 — make him a character too bril- 
liandy conscious, too delightful a combination of Tom Sawyer and Holden 
Caulfield to alienate a reader. For all his elaborate cynicism, and pompous 
"alienation," D.J., like Rojack, is a caricature who ends by vindicating 
American virility. Yet because Mailer has insisted so often that the violence 
which masculinity presupposes, even requires, cannot be denied, we must 
conclude that the reason "why we are in Vietnam" is only because "we" must 
be. 48 Such is the nature of things. Sitting at their farewell dinner, Tex and 
D.J. happily anticipate going off to see "the wizard in Vietnam," 46 A con- 
siderable practitioner of psychoanalysis himself, Mailer protests he is against 
the trade because it would kill the mystery and spontaneity of human moti- 
vation, but one is reminded here of the popular Freudian formula: observe, 
codify, sanction, and prescribe. "Vietnam, hot damn." 60 

II 

Under the influence of Wilhelm Reich, 51 the young Mailer once put him- 
self forward as a hero of the sexual revolution, and true to form, saw it in 
terms of a stirring combat. But by his own account, Mailer's political posi- 
tion is that of a "Left Conservative," 62 a confusing hybrid whose stress falls 
with increasingly apoplectic emphasis upon the latter term. And so the grand 
"war for greater sexual liberty" 63 amounted to nothing more than a crusade 
for an increased explicitness in the description of sexual activity, capped with 
the privilege of printing the taboo diction of four-letter words. This is all right 
as far as it goes. But, by a nice historical irony, the sexual libertarianism of 
the sixties had, in only a few years, managed to exceed anything Mailer de- 
sired, and in the course of time his attitudes have hardened so they might 
do credit to a parish priest He is lyric about "chastity," 64 ferocious about 
abortion, and wildly opposed to all birth control— "I hate contraception . . . 

"Ibid., p. 81. 

48 Mailer saw the years of the cold war as years of national disease, intimating any 
number of times that "an insipid sickness demands a violent far-teaching purgative." 
(The Presidential Papers, p. 134.) For some ten years he was literally crying out for war 
—the question is— which one? 

i9 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 208. 

so Ibid. 

Bi See Wilhelm Retch, The Sexual Revolution (New York: Noonday, 194;). Mailer 
appears to have been influenced more by the books of Reich's decline, when the orgasm 
became a panacea to him. Mailer later endorsed a host of attitudes Reich had always de- 
plored. 

82 The Armies of the Night, p. 143. 

03 The Presidential Papers, p. 139. 

M Ibid., p. 142. 



NORMAN MAILER 



3*3 



it's an abomination. I'd rather have those fucking communists over here." 55 
Forbidding sexuality to the young by counseling abstinence, he condemns 
onanism in the enlightened * manner of a Victorian physician: "Mastur- 
bation is bad," it "cripples people" and ends in "insanity. " r> " Finally outstrip- 
ping both the Victorians and the Church, Mailer's line would sit well on a 
Nazi propagandist: "The fact of the matter is that the prime responsibility 
of a woman probably is to be on earth long enough to find the best mate 
possible for herself, and conceive children who will improve the species." 07 
As the real implications of a sexual revolution became clear to him, Mailer 
preferred to turn from such frightening possibilities to a new campaign. 
Diverting his efforts to a war between the sexes in defense of male suprem- 
acy, he blossomed into an archconservative. "Sexual liberty" might, after 
all, apply to women as well, might even threaten the double standard and 
the subtle way in which "shame" is manipulated to control women. So Elena 
preaches from the stage of The Deer Park that women "weren't born to be 
free, they were born to have babies." 58 The dissipation of perverse guilt, the 
Reichian hope of a "sex-positive attitude" 59 proved incompatible with his own 
male-chauvinist propensity to give guilt a coercive function in sexual pol- 
itics. He seems to cherish even the notion of guilt in men, a generalized guilt 
associated with sexual activity itself, giving it the piquancy relished best by 
a puritan sensibility. 80 While Mailer found he could appreciate the "mythol- 
ogy" of Lady Chatterley, the manner in which it encouraged the notion that 
"sex could have beauty," he found it sadly ignorant of "the violence which is 
part of sex," and later came to prefer the more amenable context of filth 
which he so enjoys in Miller, arguing that actually, "most people don't find 
sex that pure, that deep, that organic." 01 Instead, they find it "sort of partial 
and hot and ugly."" 2 Best to keep it this way, for sex is really "better off 
dirty, damned, even slavish! than, clean and without guilt." 03 Guilt, he would 

55 Ibid., p. 131. 

08 Reich frequently denounced such attitudes. The Sexual Revolution has a long 
chapter quoting this sort of opinion in scientific authorities and condemning them for 
error and inhumanity. As Steven Marcus points out in The Other Victorians such con- 
victions were also common among the medical profession in the last century. 

57 The Presidential Papers, p. 1 30. 

C8 TJie Deer Park, a Play, p. 165, 

69 Reich had traced a great many social and psychological ills to the very negative 
attitude our culture holds toward sexuality. 

00 Conditioned guilt produces fear of sexuality in women so that it may be imposed 
upon rather than chosen by them, or it becomes a sign of their degradation. In men guilt 
tends to take on an aphrodisiac quality. The severe dualism in all Mailer's thinking de- 
pends on an essentially negative attitude toward sexuality. 

01 Cannibals and Christians, pp. 197—98. 
82 Ibid. 

«3Tfie Annies of the Night, p. 36. 



3^4 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



persuade us, constitutes "the existential edge of sex," without which the act is 
"meaningless." 8 * 

Lawrence was content to manipulate, Miller to cover with contempt, but 
Mailer must wrestle. One does not exorcise the specter of an insurgent female 
spirit by epithet alone, so Mailer escalated to a more intensive sexual hostility. 
The short story "The Time of Her Time" 05 is his most notable exercise in 
this regard. Here dramatic conflict is stripped to essentials as the favor of first 
orgasm is conferred upon a Jewish college girl by that professional "coclcs- 
man," Mailer's own Sergius O'Shaugnessy, a "Village stickman" able to 
"muster enough of the divine It on the head of his will" 68 (Mailerese for 
penis) to effect some vague miracle upon Time which the author recognizes 
as "existential." This lofty purpose is secondary to the expression of sexual 
hatred, Sergius' real talent. Acting upon the principle that a female "laid" is a 
female subjugated, the hero strikes with his magic weapon, a penis, that his 
comic-strip bravado impels him to refer to as "the avenger." 67 The attack 
begins when Sergius overhears his victim venture a remark on Eliot. Such 
pretension to intelligence appalls his sense of propriety and he is on the 
instant "inflamed," the avenger urging him "to prong her then and there, 
right on the floor of the party"; so he brings her home afire for the moment 
he may "grind it into her," "lay waste to her little independence" and set 
all right. 68 

Things go wrong from the start. Back at the loft where Sergius operates 
a thoroughly improbable indoor school of bullfighting, the girl fails to suc- 
cumb to that passivity which Mailer myth ordains is the only feminine route 
to the promised land of orgasm. The narrator deplores the error in grave 
literary tones: "she had fled the dominion which was liberty for her." 89 
Nature rebukes the upstart by withholding sexual satisfaction; Sergius under- 
lines the lesson by striking her across the face. When her dignity fails to col- 
lapse entirely and she answers his arrogance with a stubborn spirit of her 
own, Sergius is piqued by the challenge and willing to overlook the con- 
siderable drain on his business-like sexual economy (customarily loath to 
"score" twice on the same mark) and is willing to try another bout 

At their final match he suffers a momentary defeat through premature 
ejaculation, a blow to his careerist's reputation which requires the inflationary 
services of fellatio, thereby reducing him to what he regards as an inferior 
(passive, dependent) position. But recovering his resiliency with commenda- 
ble haste, he imposes anal intercourse upon his opponent, slowly savoring "as 
the avenger rode down to his hilt" the outrage of pain and humiliation he has 

uihid. 

65 See Advertisements for Myself, pp. 440 £f. 

e«IWi., p. 458. 

67 Ibid., p. 450 et passim. 

68 Ibid., pp. 450-51. 
88 Ibid., p. 452.. 



NORMAN MAILER 



3*5 



inflicted, and grimacing at the reader "she thrashed beneath me like a trapped 
little animal," "caught," "forced," "wounded," and so forth. 70 Since Mailer's 
logic here demands the mortification of the woman as imperative (through a 
Freudian paradox) 71 both to the victory of the male and to her own bliss, it 
requires only the additional stimulation of Sergius' rasping racist whisper, 
"You dirty little Jew," and a quick switch to "love's first hole" to bring her over 
the brink of masochistic womanhood and into the fictive reaches of vaginal 
orgasm. 72 Were it not for the dead-eye perception of her parting shot, "Your 
whole life is a lie, and you do nothing but run away from the homosexual 
that is you," 73 Sergius could claim total victory. But the match may be said to 
end in a draw. 

"The Time of Her Time" is ethnic sexual politics. It is interesting to 
compare Mailer with Roth in this respect. 74 Portnoy's long kvetch is hilar- 
ious demonstration of how elaborate cultural penis-worship may produce, 
in a man of intelligence or sensitivity, a monumental infantilism whose 
only satisfactions are a contradictory blend of onanistic self-deprecation and 
the cheap glory of settling old minority scores in the sexual exploitation of 
women. 711 But Sergius the blond beast can scarcely be charged with sensitiv- 
ity, and Mailer's sympathy appears to pander without unembarrassment before 
such goyisk virility, a Mick brutality glamorized into Hip. And so Denise 
Gondelman is laid low, masculine pride so desperate a cause it can welcome 
alliance with anti-Semitism. "If Harry Golden is the gentile's Jew, can I 
become the Golden Goy" 78 Mailer wonders in a wistful verse, brooding over 
his romance with Aryan manliness, one of the most puzzling and ubiquitous 
of his paradoxical qualities. Since Mailer himself is inordinately fond of play- 
ing the would-be-Irish-buffoon, 77 it is pertinent to remember that 
O'Shaugnessy is an adopted name and Sergius an orphan, presumed to be 
Slavic by birth. As the anomaly himself acknowledges, gracefully disin- 
genuous, "There's nothing in the world like being a fake Irishman." 78 

While his heroes are invariably studies in sexual vanity, Mailer's attitude 
toward their posturing tends to vacillate between mild irony and gratified 

70 Ibid., pp. 462-63. 

71 Freudian theory stipulates that pain is satisfaction for woman, as she is, by her true 
nature, masochistic. 

™lbid., p. 464. 

'3 Ibid., p. 465. 

74 Philip Roth, Portnoy's Complaint (New York: Random House, 1967, 1968, 1969). 

76 This callow method of shifting racial to sexual grudge and repaying injustice upon 
the oppressor's "woman" is the inspiration for Eldridge Cleaver's career as a rapist. By the 
most depressing racist logic, Cleaver first served an apprenticeship by assaulting women 
of his own race, content to mimic that staggering contempt white patriarchy habitually 
reserves for the black female. See Eldridge Cleaver, Soul on Ice (New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1968). 

76 Norman Mailer, Deaths For the Ladies and Other Disasters (New York: Putnam, 
1964), no pagination in the volume. 

77 See both Miami and the Siege of Chicago and The Armies of the Night. 

78 The Deer Park (novel), p. aa. 



326 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



participation. His considerable insights into the practice of sexuality as a 
power game never seem to affect his vivid persona] enthusiasm for the fight 
nor his sturdy conviction (curiously reminiscent of, among other things' 
two decades of arms race policy) that it's kill or be killed. 78 At times he is 
gallant enough to render homage to the enemy as a worthy opponent a 
good swinging bitch, but like any soldier hardened by his own side's agitprop 
he can also fall into the jingoism of the sexual patriot: "Most men who under- 
stand women at all feel hostility toward them. At their worst, women are 
low sloppy beasts." 80 

Mailer's verses are bits of Avenger propaganda, whimsical pubic narcis- 
sism^ always offered to the reader as "short hairs." One titled "Ode to a 
Lady" consists of a playful dialogue between male and female. The "lady" 
speaks ^ with a becoming humility, conscious of her dependence and inferi- 
ority: "Create me/ dear singing loin of some manly harp/ create me for I 
stifle where I stand." Of course the poet is far too canny to be taken in by 
this sort of stuff, and he replies in stern recognition of feminine evil-"snake 
and foulest bitch, swine of a hundred feet." His suspicions are splendidly 
vindicated in her reply, "sweet lord you're kind/ Yes come to me honey- 
bee/ and I will kill you." 81 

Love, when possible, under Mailer's sexual politic becomes a thoroughly 
ambvalent emotion. Or, as D.J. would put it, "love is dialectic, man, back and 
forth, hate and sweet." 82 Mailer is nothing if not sporting, and his com- 
bative urges, his eagerness after a sparring partner, causes the much lamented 
bitchery' of the American woman to become a species of erotic currency. 
The desirable woman is more likely to be the tough fighting spirit of the 
heroine of "The Time of Her Time," or the greedy if vacuous Guinevere of 
Barbary Shore, than Elena Esposito, the beaten loser of The Deer Park, 
in the novel "a cocker-spaniel sinking inch by inch into quick-bog," 83 but 
revamped into a feistier breed by the pert vulgarity she is given in the play. 
In arming his opponent, Mailer has of course no intention of losing the 
war. He just likes a fight and is concerned with keeping up its interest and 
assuring the paying seats that the male struggle to retain hegemony will 
have the spice of adventure about it. Lest the contestants require ideology, 
he has exercised some ingenuity in concocting an existentialist-flavored home 
brew seasoned for genital man and hereafter referred to as "sexistentialism." 
The cult owes little to the French, a great deal to the Yank Army and the 
street. 

Mailer insists on life after death, if only, as D.J. puckishly reports, that 

™ See An American Dream, "all women were killers," "women must murder unless we 
possess them altogether," etc., pp. 82, 100. 
S0 The Presidential Papers, p. 131. 

81 Cannibals and Christians, "Ode To a Lady," pp. 142-44. 

82 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 126. 

83 The comparison refers to Marilyn Moruoe, but fits Elena far better. 



NORMAN MAILER 



327 



the "beeps" of orgasm, here taken as - both the Grail quest 8 * and a record 
of personal achievement, may be recorded and rewarded somewhere beyond. 
Sexistentialism is therefore religious rather than philosophic. As practiced 
by women, it is merely a hunt for fertilization, a minima] affair. As 
practiced by men, however, it is a thrilling test of self, played according to 
a demanding performance ethic which steers the athletic "hunter-fighter- 
fucker" 85 past the land mines of homosexuality, onanism, impotence, and 
capitulation to women. Through the perils of sexual traffic with women the 
courageous may "lay questions to rest" and "build upon a few answers" hav- 
ing "tested himself" and "fought the good fight or the evil fight" he is here- 
after "able to live a tougher, more heroic life," his maleness certified, 
fortified. 88 Little wonder that Mailer's sexual journalism reads like the sport- 
ing news grafted onto a series of war dispatches. As the formula of "fucking 
as conquest" holds true, the conquest is not only over the female, but over the 
male's own fears for his masculinity, his courage, his dominance, the test of 
erection. To fail at any enterprise is to become female, defeated by the lurk- 
ing treachery of Freudian bisexuality, the feminine in a man giving out like a 
trick knee at a track meet. 87 Since all this is so arduous, men are, Mailer 
believes, self-evidently entitled to victory, their "existential assertion." 
Reminding his teammates that "nobody was born a man" Mailer lays down 
the regulations— "you earned your manhood, provided you were good enough, 
bold enough." 88 

It would be difficult not to experience a certain amused compassion for 
such grandiose effort, were it not so remarkably smug, so sure of its monopoly 
on the human condition. Presumably arguing from the ardors of the sheets, 
Mailer's sexual politics reasons that men have more privileges, "more rights, 
and more powers" because life takes more out of them, leaves them "used 
more." 80 Women are supine during the only significant moments of their 
lives, but the male is forced to exert himself. And sexual effort seems to be 
much too taxing. Mailer's heroes conduct themselves as if there were just so 
much semen in the barrel of life, and sex an indulgence the prudent were 
best to shun: the resemblance to Victorian caution over the "spending" of 
semen is astonishing. 90 'You literally can fuck your head off," "loose your 

8 * Part of the elite quality of the Hipster in "The White Negro" is his superior orgasm, 
orgasm being equated with existential virtu. Needless to say, Mailer subscribes to the most 
romantic theories of black sexuality which both Baldwin and Hansbeny have pointed out 
are a new paternalism. "The White Negro" is in many ways an attempt to "cash in" on 
black alienation. 

85 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 1 57. 

88 Tfee Presidential Papers, p. 141. 

87 These ideas are elaborated at length in "The White Negro" where the feminine is 
constantly equated with weakness and failure, masculinity with strength and success. 

» 8 The Armies of the Night, p. 36. 

88 The Presidential Papers, p. 144. 

Bu See Marcus, TJie Other Victorians and the remarks in Chapter 6. 



328 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



brains, wreck your body," "eternally" Mailer warns Paul Krassner in an 
essay-interview.' 1 His prose, both didactic and biographical, is full of ter 
rified endorsements of Freud's prescription that sexuality is inimical to cul 
jural achievement with harrowed accounts of sapped energy, wasted time To 
Krassner s objection that sexuality is pleasurable and undertaken just or. 
that account, Mailer responds like a grim semen bank on the verge of 
col apse, Jesuitically fierce over Procreation, nearly frantic that a seed be 
spilled in vain: "As you get older, you begin to grow more and more 
obsessed with procreation. You begin to feel used up. Another part of one- 
self is fast diminishing. There isn't that much of oneself left." 82 Erik Erik 
son is pained when ova go unfertilized. Mailer is preoccupied with worry 
over precious seed wasted upon prophylactic, the bedclothes, th e onanist's 
nanky, the homosexual's rectum. 

The Mailerite warrior-hunter is never too fastidious to obey the old maxim 
of eat what you kill " His strategy of "fucking to win" converts intercourse 
to a procedure of absorbing the other's numa a s the victorious sits down 
to digest the new spirit which has entered the flesh." 83 This justifies the 
expense of effort and makes sexuality "nourishing,"" a diet of flesh which 
Mailer the ideologue recommends in the didacticism of his essays quite as 
much as m the overstated feasts of his fictive heroes. In fact, the most fas- 
cmatmg problem in dealing with his writing is to establish the connection 
between his fiction and his other prose writings, for ideas one is convinced 
are bang satirized in the former are sure to appear with straightforward 
personal endorsement in the latter. Sergius expects to benefit from contact 
with Jewish intelligence by his bouts with Denise. Rojack goes even further 
Contemplating his wife's corpse he imagines a cannibal dinner: "Ruta and 
I would sit down to eat. The two of us would sup on Deborah's flesh we 
would eat for days: the deepest poisons in us would be released from' our 
cells, I would digest my wife's curse before it could form. And this idea 
was thrilling to me."- Then he has a better idea-why not kill Ruta too 
and devour both of them? Appetite stops short of act, but having slaughtered 
his spouse Rojack immediately understands he has ingested her power And 
it works. Applying the lessons of Mailer the pedagogue, Rojack explains 
his success with the cops and the Mafia is assured by the power he has 
acquired through consuming women: Ruta contributes cunning, Deborah 
meanness and after she is beaten to death, Cherry, the golden-hearted whore, 
pays off like a good-luck charm in Vegas. 

The same cannibalistic logic appears to operate in Mailer's essay accounts 
ot bow a writer "keeps in shape," wisdom imparted through the parable of 

61 The Presidential Papers, p. 144. 

M Ibid., pp. 143-44. 

™lbid., p. 141. 

** Ibid. 

is An American Dream, p. 50. 



NORMAN MAILER 



3*9 



a prizefighter who prepared to meet masculine hostility in the ring by absorb- 
ing the rage of "two prostitutes, not one, taking the two of them into the 
same bed," 86 battening upon what might be taken either as their "evil" or 
their oppressed fury, their "meanness." Just, Mailer lectures, as "masculinity" 
is fed by "feminine" foods such as milk and chicken, which can be "domi- 
nated completely" because "compliant, tender, passive to our seizure," 97 it 
is even further enhanced by the macho Eucharist, "bulls' balls," which he 
recommends with manic earnestness not only as a "delicacy" but as "equal 
to virility." 98 And that of course is the equivalent of grace in Mailer's system, 
"more than the stamina of a stud . . . power, strength, the ability to com- 
mand, the desire to alter life." 09 A moral absolute, goodness is male. 

Not only does Mailer conform to that curious pattern in American media 
which, as Diana Trilling once pointed out, 100 insists on portTaying hostile 
society as a female intent upon destroying courage, honesty and adventure, 
he has gone so far as to conceive of masculinity as a precarious spiritual 
capital in endless need of replenishment and threatened on every side. True 
to the conflict between his perception and his allegiance, Mailer has fre- 
quently parodied masculine vanity: in the naivete of the soldiers of The 
Naked and the Dead (Minetta, for instance, with his record fourteen "lays" 
—not bad for a fella my age, he hugs himself), or in D.J.'s wry allusion to 
the "grab for your dick competition snit." 101 Even with Sergius there are 
moments when one is certain the author knows O'Shaugnessy is a bully and 
a fool. But the comprehension of folly is so little a guarantee of its renun- 
ciation in Mailer, that his critical and political prose is based on a set of 
values so blatantly and comically chauvinist, as to constitute a new aesthetic. 
In a witty essay Mary Ellmann has described it as "phallic criticism." 102 It 
measures intelligence as "masculinity of mind," 103 condemns mediocre au- 
thors for "dead-stick prose," praises good writers for setting "virile example" 
and notes that since "style is root" (penis), the best writing naturally re- 
quires "huge loins." 104 Really negative judgments are reserved for all that 
is or can be deprecated as feminine (here Mailer indulges himself unstint- 

60 Cannibals and Christians, p. 127. 
07 The Presidential Papers, p. 298. 
98 Ibid., p. 297. 
os Ibid. 

100 Diana Trilling, "The Image of Woman in Contemporary Literature" in The 
Woman in America, edited by Jay Lifton (Boston: Beacon, 1964); Leslie Fiedler's Love 
and Death in the American Novel (New York: Stein and Day, i960) first formulated 
this thesis. 

101 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 176. 

102 Mary Ellmann, Thinking About Women (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1968). 
Ellmann is the first literary critic I know of to comment extensively on recent masculine 
reaction. 

103 The Deer Park (novel), p. 31. 

10i Cannibals and Christians, pp. 57, 128, 194, 250. 



33° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



ingly), or like Jean Genet, can be baited as "unconscionably faggot." 1 "* 
As he settles into patriarchal middle age, Mailer's obsession with machismo 
brings to mind a certain curio sold in Coney Island and called a Peter 
Meter; a quaint bit of folk art, stamped out in the shape of a ruler with 
printed inches and appropriate epithets to equate excellence with size. Mailer 
operates on this scale on an abstract or metaphoric plane. His characters 
male and female, labor under simpler delusions. Guinevere is indefatigable 
on the subject of her lover's "whangs"; D.J. is paralyzed with the usual fear 
that someone else has a bigger one. 

Ill 

Mailer has a fine nose for sociological fashion and his hand-wringino 
over the "Womanization of America" at which "men have collaborated," 
positing a state of affairs where "women are becoming more selfish, more 
greedy, less romantic, less warm, more lusty and filled with hate" has a 
Reader's Digest character: "This country is entering into the most desperate, 
nightmarish time in its history. Unless everyone in America gets a great deal 
braver, everything is going to get worse— including the womanization of 
America." 106 It is vaguely depressing to see a literary man vending the same 
trash as those hundreds of psychologues and quacks whose jeremiads con- 
found the public with such titles as "The Feminization of the American Male," 
"The Disappearing Sexes," and "The Flight From Woman," 107 zealous 
tracts which thrash away at the cliche" of overbearing modern woman, de- 
plore the rising threat of homosexuality, and glamorize the blunter male su- 
premacist style which the middle class is fond of patronizing as proletarian, 
or good-old-days. This order of "thinker," taking his own definition of "mas- 
culine" and "feminine" as both nature and nurture, innate and acquired 
virtue, announces any deviation from his norms as representing the most de- 
plorable decay in moral standards, a weakening of the social fiber of the na- 
tion, which permits intolerable female gains and opens the way to a "flood 
tide of homosexuality," a "creeping virus of neuterization" which takes on 
the bogey aspect communism has for a true believer on the Right. 

But Mailer is fully aware that the American male is sufficiently vicious, 
virile and violent. Surely there is as much proof of it today in Why Are We in 
Vietnam?, just as there was in the "Jap hunt" of The Naked and the Dead, 
Yet Mailer consistently pursuing his own convoluted and probably self-indul- 
gent "strategy of self-consciousness" can only dramatize and illustrate the 
character of masculinist sensibility while remaining totally incapable of rea- 
sonable criticism of it. For against the logic of virility, it is pointless to reason, 

105 The Presidential Papers, p. 206. 

106 Cannibals and Christians, pp. 1 99, 20 1 . 

107 See Patricia Sexton, The Feminized Male (New York: Random House, 1969); 
Robert P. Oldenwald, M.D., The Disappearing Sexes (New York: Random House, 
1965); Kail Stem, The Flight From Woman (New York: Noonday, 1965)' 



NORMAN MAILER 



33i 



pointless to raise any serious objections to "masculine aggression," since to 
do so is to frustrate nature itself, and, paradoxically, to demoralize culture 
as well. The military men's house must find wars and feed its cells upon vic- 
tims, lest its values degenerate into the pacifism Mailer denigrates as "un- 
manly," or slip to the level of effeminacy and succumb to homosexuality. To 
renounce virility is tantamount to renouncing masculinity, hence, identity, 
even self. 



I think there may be more homosexuals today than there were fifty years ago. 
If so, the basic reason might have to do with a general loss of faith in the 
country, faith in the meaning of one's work, faith in the notion of one's self 
as a man. When a man can't find dignity in his work, he loses virility. Mas- 
culinity is not something given to you, something you're bom with, but some- 
thing you gain. And you gain it by winning small battles with honor. Because 
there is very little honor left in American life. 108 

With this ominous thunder Mailer acknowledges that maleness and mas- 
culinity are not equivalent states; the latter is earned, like Scout badges or 
plenary indulgences, acquired slowly through unremitting effort, which if 
slackened for a moment, plunges the subject into the slough of sexual heresy 
fuzzily described as lack of self-esteem or faith in the American Way of Life. 

The real abyss which portentous phrases such as "existential dread" were 
invented to mask is the fear of nonexistence. That, or the secret terror of 
homosexuality; a mixture of sin, fascination, and fear which drives Mailer to 
his heterosexual posturing. To be faggot, damned, leprous— to cease to be 
virile were either to cease to be— or to become the most grotesque form of 
feminine inferiority— queer. 

Believing that violence is an innate psychological trait in the male, Mailer 
insists that repression can only lead to greater dangers. In the strange per- 
sonal mishmash of hypochondria and pseudo-medicine to which he sub- 
scribes, Mailer finds the genesis of cancer in throttled violence. Therapy lies 
only in expression, in "acting out." In a versified confidence upon certain try- 
ing personal experiences Mailer diagnoses how "The first unmanageable cell/ 
of the cancer which was to/ stifle his existence" made its appearance in the 
subject "on a morning when by/ an extreme act of the will/ he chose not 
to strike his/ mother." Since this was some "thirty-six hours after he had 
stabbed his wife," one is assured that hygiene is served by violence perpe- 
trated, undermined by that restrained. Only when one's feelings are denied is 
there medical danger, or as Mailer elucidates, "his/ renunciation of violence/ 
was civilized too civilized/ for his cells which proceeded/ to revolt." 108 

Yet any attentive reader of Mailer's fiction is constantly made aware of how 

108 Cannibals and Christians, pp. 200-1. 

109 Deaths for the Ladies, "A Wandering in Prose for Hemingway, November i960," 
no pagination. 



332 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



explicitly he demonstrates the violence of his characters as springing directly 
from their stifled homosexuality. The anal rapes Rojack and Sergius perform 
are simply transferences (accompanied by sadism) of homosexual urges their 
elaborate masculinity seeks to disguise. In The Naked and the Dead it is 
made very clear that each homosexual indiscretion with which General Cum- 
mings chooses to embarrass young Lieutenant Heame is followed by a ges- 
ture of cruelty. If his scarcely latent desire compels him to search out Heame 
and call him to his tent while every officer in the company looks on, Cum- 
mings will visit his humiliating dependence on the younger man by throw- 
ing a cigarette butt on the floor and commanding Heame to pick it up. 
Croft's violence also arises from a throttled homosexual impulse. All 
the beauty Tex and D.J, experience on the day they flee from their tainted 
elders to rove defenseless in the wilds is turned to cruelty when their 
adolescent affection sours into hatred before the taboo of homosexuality. 
In an essay on football, Mailer explains that it is the suppressed sexuality in 
the players' habitual gesture of bottom slapping (which he traces ingen- 
iously to its origin in homosexual flirtation), plus the act of centering the ball 
"in the classic pose of sodomy" which "liberates testosterone" and enables the 
player, by the "prongsmanship and buggery at the seat" of his "root" to carry 
on and hit hard in the "happy broil." 110 

The constant interpretation urged upon the reader in Mailer's work seems 
to be that cruelty and violence spring out of the repressed homosexuality of 
men's-house culture, both emotions inevitable and beneficial because they con- 
stitute the only defense against homosexuality which Mailer's own sanc- 
timonious sexual dogmatism regards as a greater evil than murder. This is 
nowhere made more graphic than in an account of the notorious Paret- 
Griffith prizefight in The Presidential Papers. "Now at the weigh-in that 
morning, Paret had insulted Griffith irrevocably, touching him on the but- 
tocks, while making a few more remarks about his manhood. They almost 
had their fight on the scales." 111 The fight that did take place was an 
instance of murder acting as surrogate for sexuality. Ignoring both the bell 
and the referee, Griffith caught Paret in the ropes and struck him some 
eighteen times in three seconds, "making a pent-up whimpering sound all 
the while he attacked, the right hand whipping like a piston rod." 112 Sitting 
at ringside, Mailer reports he was "hypnotized" since he had "never seen 
one man hit another so hard and so many times." 113 "Off on an orgy," 
Griffith was uncontrollable: "If he had been able to break loose from his 
handlers and the referee, he would have jumped Paret to the floor and whaled 
on him there." 1 " The expression "whaled on" is synonymous here both with 



110 Advertisements for Myself, "The T Formation," pp. 
31I TJie Presidential Papers, p, 243. 
112 Ibid., p. 243. 
"3 Ibid,, p. 244. 
"¦* Ibid. 



394-95- 



NORMAN MAILER 



333 



sodomize and kill. Paret died in a coma three days later, and the nasty inci- 
dent gave boxing a bad name. Mailer's analysis of the event has a bril- 
liant, unerring clarity. His defense of it is another matter. First, he informs 
us that "violence may be an indispensable element of life" then that fight 
managers are simply unheralded defenders of "an unstated view of life 
which was religious," and finally, he rationalizes all by declaring that the 
killer "sickens the air about him if he does not find some half-human way to 
kill a little in order not deaden all." 116 The fear of "deadening all" is clearly 
fear of falling into the plague of nonviolence, or the lethal defamation of 
homosexuality: 



The accusation of homosexuality arouses a major passion in many men; they 
spend their lives resisting it with a biological force. There is a kind of man who 
spends every night of his life getting drunk in a bar, he rants, he brawls, he 
ends in a small rumble on the street; women say 'Tor God's sake, he's homo- 
sexual, Why doesn't he just turn queer and get his suffering over with." Yet 
men protect him. It is because he's choosing not to become homosexual. It was 
put best by Sartre, who said that a homosexual is a man who practices homo- 
sexuality. A man who does not is not homosexual— he is entitled to the dignity 
of his choice. He is entitled to the fact that he chooses not to become homo- 
sexual, and is paying presumably his price. 116 

One hardly wishes to argue against the right of sexual self-determination— 
but who paid? Paret is dead. Is the violence this choice appears to involve 
really worth it for anyone, even for frightened men? Or is its justification 
only some tortuous and deceptive fanaticism of Mailer's and those he speaks 
for, dependent on the fallacy that homosexual acts make one "a Homosexual," 
some odd and inferior being below the dignity of manhood? In a climate of 
sexual counterrevolution, homosexuality constitutes the mortal offense against 
heterosexual orthodoxy, the unforgivable sin that sends one off irreparably 
in the vast gray fields of virility's damned. 117 And this equation of homo- 
sexuality and non-violence as effeminacy is, of course, Mailer's own, or that 
of one time and place (America in the last two decades). Genet's hoods are 
as brutal (e.g. by Mailer's standards, virile) in their sexual as in their other 
habits. But Mailer's definition of masculinity does depend both on a rabid sort 
of heterosexual activism and the violence he imagines to be inherent in male 
nature. Should he slack in either, he ceases to exist. 

Caste and class theology are curious affairs. In Dickens' work there is an 
equation of gentility with grace that accounts for the nightmare which 
Oliver Twist, to name but one example, experiences until his origins are 

118 Ibid., pp. 245—47. 
u«H*L, p. 243- 

1 1T This despite the more recent trend to improve the "virility image" of homosexuality 
through the sadism of "leather bars," etc. 



334 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



certified as bourgeois and he receives the class surety that represents salva- 
tion. In Faulkner's Light in August, in Sinclair Lewis' Kingshlood Royal 
and other examinations of our native racism, the fear of a drop of Negro 
blood so unsettles a supposed white as to leave him suspended over Pascal's 
abyss. Mailer has constructed a theology on sexual grounds which operates 
in similar fashion. Despite the half-hearted apology of "The Homosexual 
Villain," 118 its liberal patronization astonished at the idea that perhaps 
"homosexuals were people, too" 119 Mailer has never actually ceased to 
believe "that there was an intrinsic relation between homosexuality and 
evil," 120 So the devil is an anal force indeed— and the Mailer ethic teeters 
on its Manichean tightrope between good and evil, exhilarated at tempta- 
tion. 

Not only do homosexuals constitute a pariah group, they do so because 
the pederast's act is thought to imply a descent into the foreign and inferior 
nature of the female. D.J.'s self-confessed anal compulsion, which leaves him 
a "shit-oriented late adolescent," "marooned on the balmy tropical isle of Anal 
Referent Metaphor," 121 is matched by Mailer's own which dotes on scatol- 
ogy and drags on for pages about defecation. 122 But while buggery confers 
an extra honor on the "male" partner conquering a potential equal, "cause 
asshole is harder to enter than cunt and so reserved for the special tool," 123 
to be buggered is to be hopelessly humiliated. Since sexuality is inescapably 
a case of victimization in Mailer's mind, where the winner "prongs" or 
"brands" the loser, and having defeated the other, consumes the other's 
power, it is only natural that D.J. should hedge, poised uncertainly between 
the fear that Tex might "brand him up his ass" and the urge to "steal the iron 
from Texas' ass and put it in his own." 124 Sergius and Rojack just brand the 
female, easier to bully, a reasonable compromise, and safely within the ethos 
of sexual politics, for unlike Lawrence, Mailer is afraid that masculine cou- 
pling might undermine patriarchal hierarchy. In a sex war, faggots are de- 
serters. The presence of homosexuality or effeminacy negates the regenerative 
effect of the sacramental bull's balls: "What's the use of commanding women 
he could not command before, if he does not know how to fight off other 
men, and is not ready to leam?" Mailer asks, adding that "what freezes the 
homosexual in his homosexuality is not the fear of women so much as the 
fear of the masculine world with which he must war if he wishes to keep 

118 "The Homosexual Villain" in Advertisements for Myself. 
Wlbid., p. 209. 

120 Ibid., p. 207. 

121 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 50. 

122 See The Presidential Papers on Waste and in Cannibals and Christians, "The 
Metaphysics of the Belly." 

123 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 203. 

124 Ibid., pp. 102-3. 



NORMAN MAILER 



335 



the woman." 125 Or conversely, the would-be homosexual's fear of the male 
he must conquer or "feminize." 

Faced with the stalemate of desire and the hazards of the pecking order, 
D-J- and Tex conclude a blood pact whereby "they are twins, never to be near 
as lovers again, but killer brothers." 120 For they have comprehended that 
"it was there, murder between them under all friendship. For God was a 
beast, not a man, and God said 'Go out and kill— fulfill my will, go and 
kill.' " 127 Driven by its values and convictions, its dualist opposition between 
God and the Devil, male and female, virility and effeminacy, confronted by 
the twin perils of waning masculine dominion and the dangerous fascina- 
tion of homosexuality, Mailer's "better to murder than to bum" has brought 
the counterrevolutionary sensibility to a breaking point of belligerent anxiety 
(and perhaps we experience it in other areas too as the practice of virility 
grows more and more at odds with life on the planet). Machismo stands 
at bay, cornered by the threat of a second sexual revolution, which, in ob- 
literating the fear of homosexuality, could challenge the entire temperamental 
catagories (masculine and feminine) of patriarchal culture— this is where 
Genet is relevant. 

125 TJie Presidential Papers, p. 278. Note the discussion on virility and bull's balls is 
from the Presidential Paper on Waste. 
128 Why Are We in Vietnam?, p. 204, 
127 Ibid., p. 203, 



EIGHT 



Jean Qenet 



i 

It would appear that love is dead. Or very likely in a bad way. As to 
those practitioners of romantic love who linger on, the two most solicitous, 
Genet and Nabokov, are of suspicious orthodoxy. Lolita is as much a matter 
of kidnap, rape, and coercion as the terrible passion of a lost enamored 
soul who has followed his culture's blandishment of a child-wife to its lit- 
eral conclusion. For the rest, hostility between the sexes has handily out- 
distanced romance in interest, a development due less to the inherent faults 
of the romantic myth (a sentimental idealism and traditionally, a rather in- 
hibited sexuality) than it is to the animus toward women which their gains 
in this century have provoked from jealous patriarchal sentiment. The mis- 
tress or beloved is dethroned, even defamed; she has become a villain, a 
nuisance, or a deserving victim. As we all know, it has been open season 
even on mothers for some two decades. Those who continue to display a ro- 
mantic enthusiasm for the amorous, tend like Humbert Humbert or Genet, 
to be members of the "sexual minorities." 

There is a sense in which the homosexual is our current "nigger" of love, 
his 1 sexual life a bigger social risk and surrounded by a more hostile en- 

1 Following custom, the term "homosexual" refers to male homosexual here. "Lesbian- 
ism" would appear to be so little a threat at the moment that it is hardly ever mentioned. 
Once a target for liberal sympathies (Havelock Ellis' introduction to The Well of Loneli- 



]EAN GENET 337 

vironment, at any moment liable to pounce in ridicule or condemnation, than 
ever threatened Mailer's bullying "White Negro." In a great many places 
homosexual acts are still crimes under law, whereas Mailer's heroes, eager to 
offend society, must push on all the way to murder. In nearly any bar Divine 
could stand at bay and hear "herself" judged: 

She smiled all around, and each one answered only by turning away, but that 
was a way of answering. The whole cafe thought that the smile of (for the 
colonel: the invert; for the shopkeepers: the fairy; for the banker and the 
waiters: the fag; for the gigolos: that one; etc.) was despicable. Divine did not 
press the point. From a tiny black satin purse she took a few coins which she laid 
noiselessly on the marble table. The cafe disappeared, and Divine was meta- 
morphosed into one of those monsters that are painted on walls— chimeras or 
griffins— for a customer, in spite of himself, murmured a magic word as he 
thought of her: "Homoseckshual." 2 



In pariah state there is some magic still, and the myth of romantic love has 
always prospered on the social hostility directed at star-crossed lovers, adul- 
terers, or those who transgress the boundaries of caste and class. Its clandes- 
tine and forbidden character alone tends to grant homosexual love the 
glamour waning in literary accounts of heterosexuality, lost together with 
their guarded inhibitions and, regrettably, their tenderness. 

Notwithstanding its romance trappings of sighs and roses, the love ethic 
of Genet's novels is even more atavistic than the romantic variety. Courtly in 
fact, it observes the traditional virtues of loyalty, secrecy, humility, and idol- 
atry. From the perspective of sexual politics, it is possible to regard European 
courtly love as either a cruel joke— or the first entering wedge in patriarchal 
consistency. For by an anomaly social history is helpless to explain, the 
courtly lover, though de facto master, chose to play the role of servant to his 
lady. Genet has, with considerable political realism, turned this situation 
back upon its feet, and in the feudalistic hierarchy of his prisons, converted 
French abbeys founded by the nobility of the ancien regime and haunted still 
by the perfume of medievalism, it is the male partner who receives homage. 

¦ness, T. S. Eliot's to Nightwood~), or a screen for male homosexuality (Proust's Albertine) 
the woman as homosexual is today as decidedly a sexual object as other women. The two 
excited females in the bathtub on Forty-second Street screens pander actually to male 
fantasy which intervenes heroically between them, taking on the pair at once. Holly- 
wood's The Fox and other productions of popular cinema are also likely to be directed at 
masculine audiences, while underground or art films ignore lesbians for the more ex- 
plosive (because more realistically conceived) topic of male homosexuality. Whatever its 
potentiality in sexual politics, female homosexuality is currently so dead an issue that 
while male homosexuality gains a grudging tolerance, in women the event is observed in 
scorn or in silence. 

* Jean Genet, Our Lady of the Flowers, translated from the French by Bernard Frecht- 
man (New York: Grove, 1963), Bantam reprint, p. 73. 



33 8 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



The heroes of his romances are king-sized hoodlums, the courdy lovers at 
their knees not masculine, but feminine, whores and queens. 

Although he is, as Sartre points out, a "passeiste," 8 or one who lives in 
another age, Genet's feudal system is simply more honest than that of our 
other authors in its open recognition of power, its clear parallel to masculine 
cultures such as those of the Near East and the Orient, where older warrior 
was served by page, priest by acolyte, tyrant by the objects of either sex who 
suited his whim. In Death-watch, Genet's first play and the one nearest to 
the closed milieu of his fiction, Green Eyes, the convicted murderer and 
therefore the most male or noble, sounds off before his vassals like a baronial 
paterfamilias: "Here in the cell, I'm the one who bears the brunt ... I 
know I need a strong back. Like Snowball. He bears the same weight. But 
for the whole prison. Maybe there's someone else, a Number One Big 
Shot who bears it for the whole world!" 4 By such a structure does the pa- 
triarch face existence and live for his dependents, the nameless Misses, his 
offspring, his subjects, his chattels— minors all. At Genet's children's prison, 
Mettray, the inmates lived in "families" governed by a "head of the family" 
and his chief retainer, and "elder brother," a bully put in charge of the 
younger and weaker who are his concubines or "chickens." Genet's prison 
hierarchy is constructed in terms of sex: the pure virility of the killer at the 
top, on the next tier lesser Big Shots, macs or pimps, 6 then crashers (thieves 
who operate with a jimmy, breaking and entering) and on a lower plane, 
the queens and chickens who serve them. Chickens are subject to sale, 
"discipline" and even murder. Lowest of all are the jerks, pure scum, never 
selected for concubinage, but subject to rape. A jerk's life is hell. 

Since all is precedence and rank, reciprocity is quite impossible and re- 
quited love as rare in Genet as it is fleeting. Homosexual love is a life of con- 
tinual rejection. There is always a better-looking queen for the lord to 
expropriate; there is always one more commandingly masculine for the 
"chicken" to run to. Yet the obligation to loyalty rests heavily and exclusively 
upon the feminine partner for the male is permitted, even expected, to be 
promiscuous. Due to the regulations and the punishments of guards, intrigue 
is required, and in a world where homosexuality, like love, is both irrepressible 

s Jean Paul Sartre, Saint Genet, Actor and Martyr, translated from the French by 
Bernard Frechtman (New York: George Braziller, 1963), Mentor reprint, p. 9. 

4 Jean Genet, Deathwatch, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman (New 
York: Grove, 1954, 1961), pp. 147-48. 

B Note the ranks of mac and casseur (pimps and crashers). "Mac" is generally trans- 
lated as "pimp" and in fact it does mean this, but primarily it implies toughness, and an 
open contempt for women. As Philip Thody points out, the distinction the mac enjoys 
over the casseur depends chiefly on this last trait. Philip Thody, Jean Genet (London: 
Hamish Hamilton, 1968), p. 94. That "pimp" is an attribute connected with but occasion- 
ally separable from an occupation is attested to by the fact that in Mettray adolescent 
boys who have never known women are called mac, to which the English translation of 
"pimp" scarcely does justice. I shall use the two terms alternately. 



JEAN GENET 339 

and condemned, secrecy is a necessity against the scom of all and sundry. 
Idolatry is also a feminine function. The mac is "daungerous" or hard to get, 
his most magnanimous gesture a momentary display of possessiveness. Ten- 
derness or affection are beneath him: for a male to love would be to lose 
status. Every equality is forbidden. Proposing himself to another youth, Genet 
is rebuked with a dismayed "Huh? We're the same age. It wouldn't be any 
fun." 9 

In his account of Genet, Sartre constructs a theory, sturdily Marxist in 
bias, that it was the lifelong feeling of guilt branded on him as a 
child by his foster parents when they caught him stealing and sent him to 
spend the next fifteen years in the "children's hell" of Mettray that led Genet 
to homosexuality. The hypothesis is at odds with Genet's own assertion that 
homosexuality preceded his crimes against property. 7 And indeed, the dizzy- 
ing shame, followed by a stubbornly resistant contumacy, which is Genet's 
stand toward the world, originates with sex, even with the "original sin" of 
his birth, a bastard and abandoned child. Weighted down with guilt, already 
an "unnatural" phenomenon in a society based on family and property, it is 
somehow logical that he should complete his fate by advancing to the "un- 
natural" life style of homosexuality, where he can further outrage "nature" 
by becoming a feminine or passive partner, furnishing a last touch by ac- 
cepting the most ignominious role, laying claim to "the gravest insult"— 
cocksucker. 8 

Just as he resolved to be the thief they had made him by naming him one, 
Genet, once arrived at prison, insisted on living out the sexual guilt imposed 
on him both by his rape and the gentleness which provoked it. Discovering 
that the other boys were "stronger and more vicious" which in this school as 
unfortunately in most, is taken to mean more masculine, Genet insisted on 
living out the sexual or feminine shame they heaped on him— determined he 
would become "the fairy they saw in me." 9 The attitude implies a perverse 

G Jean Genet, The Thief's Journal, translated from the French (New York: Grove, 
1964), p. 140. 

7 Sartre, op. cit. Sartre acknowledges Genet's version only to discard it. See page 91. 

8 Jean Genet, TJie Miracle of the Rose, translated from the French by Bernard Frecht- 
man (New York: Grove, 1966), p. 76. Genet informs us that "among toughs, it (the 
epithet, cocksucker) is very often punishable by death," Ibid. The degree to which eroti- 
cism and shame are inseparable in Genet is a nice illustration of how deeply guilt 
pervades our apprehension of the sexual, an unpleasant fact of sexual politics and hardly 
less true of heterosexual society than it is of Genet's: "I know by some indefinable, 
imperceptible change, that it is a shudder of love— it is both poignant and delightful, 
perhaps because of the memory of the word shame that accompanied it in the beginning." 
Such a sentiment is probably universal. Ibid. 

Genet, The Thief's Journal, p. 175. Frechtman has "malicious," but "vicious" is 
closer to the French "mechant." It is necessary we realize that "Genet" in this essay must 
stand only for that character around whom "the legend of Genet" has been constructed 
in autobiographical novels signed Jean Genet. Of Jean Genet's own lite we know nothing, 
or next to nothing. 



34° 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



submission which is both fideistic and heretical, an implicit agreement with 
the prevailing social tenet that homosexuality and thievery constitute essences, 
rather than acts, and are immutable states of being. Because "thief" or "fairy" 
are words used to discourage one from being them, Genet's total acceptance 
of them is not only fatalistic, but covertly mutinous. 

The grotesquerie of sexual role was, at Mettray, as it is elsewhere, acknowl- 
edged to be fated, even predestined. For a brief period Genet tried to evade 
his "wild nature," his femininity, by becoming a crasher and serving time at 
Fontevrault for breaking and entering, in the impossible hope of acquiring 
"the clear simplicity of manliness" through adopting the "steel penis" of a 
jimmy, an instrument from which he tells us "emanated an authority that 
made me a man," and would promote him above faggotry's "humble ways." 10 
But even when a jimmy intercedes, the preordained is not to be cheated. 
Bulkaen, whom he courts to be his chicken, deserts him for the more impres- 
sibly virile Botchako and Genet ends where he began, mistress to the Big 
Shot Divers, still the queen he was at sixteen on his "bridal day" at Mettray. 
He is still nobody, still hardly better than a jerk. 

Since for Genet, it is a case of rank by individual fate, sex role is estab- 
lished once and for all at two polarities of inferior and superior: the apparent 
deviations, young toughs like Our Lady and Bulkaen, are simply tadpoles, 
creatures in transition to a better destiny. It would be hard to find a more 
brutal or unsavory definition of masculine and feminine than Genet's, since 
it is simply an exaggeration of that in current use. Masculine is superior 
strength, feminine is inferior weakness. There is one exception however: 
Genet has jealously reserved intelligence and moral courage for his queens; 
for himself. The toughness of the toughs relies on their status, their largely 
decorative masculature (they disdain labor) and their meanness. Like 
Botchako they express their sexual mastery in choice phrases: "You bitch, 
you swallow it by the mouthful"; "I'll shoot it up your hole, you punk!" 11 
Since their status is derived from their subjects, females or males feminized 
into submission, a pimp like Darling speaking out of the conviction that a 
mere woman would contribute less to his prestige, can boast when buggering 
Divine, "a male who fucks a male is a double male." 12 

Just as Genet's anti-morality is but an inversion of peasant folk-Catholicism 
—its sense of property, its literal apprehension of theological abstractions 
(grace, sin, etc.)— so his notions of sex role and rank are the most flat-footed 
ones available in his culture, quite without Lawrence's subtlety, archaic in 
their direct presentation of power and subordination: a vicious and omnip- 
otent supervirility contrasted to a fluttering helplessness and abjection. In 
his world of prostitution and crime the woman or queen is ruled by force, 

10 Genet, The Miracle of the Rose, p. 27, 

11 Ibid., p. ai. 

12 Genet, Our Lady of the Flowers, p. 153. (Here the page number refers to tLe Lard- 
cover, rather than, as elsewhere, to the Bantam reprint.) 



)EAN GENET 



34i 



by violence, and by ostentatious masculine disdain. Her femininity is pure 
servility, graphically enlarged beyond that bare abstract, almost discreet out- 
line codified and prescribed by Freudianism: "masochism" is simply open self- 
hatred, "narcissism" a realistic sense of the self as object (vanity is a male pre- 
rogative), and "passivity" frankly fear, despair, and resignation. Since the 
pervasive effect of Genet's habitual ironic exaggeration is to unmask our com- 
mon social hypocrisy, the fainter aspersion attached to the feminine by our 
other authors is enlarged to a candid repugnance everywhere in his work. 
There is scarcely need to fret over how Genet, a jailbird, may have come in 
touch with popular Freudianism (itself but a redaction of widespread and 
durable patriarchal assumptions) when far more remote literary references 
abound in his work, among them the most sophisticated allusions to the 
French poets. Dickens is also clearly an influence; the great trial scene in 
Our Lady of the Flowers is deliberately modeled on Fagin's sentencing in 
Oliver Twist, 

In a sex ethic founded so solidly upon sexual guilt and inferiority, which, 
womanlike, Genet carries within him, sexuality itself must logically operate 
both as punishment and a confirmation of his status, the very moment of its 
enaction a fevered and mortifying accusation, a terrible reproach. As Sartre 
characterizes sodomy in the novels: "The sex act is the festival of submission, 
also the ritual renewal of the feudal contract whereby the vassal becomes 
the lord's liegeman." 13 And like Marie Bonaparte's properly masochistic fe- 
male, Genet as queen is impaled, tortured, pierced, and subjugated by the 
male whose penis is a "sharp instrument with the cruel and sudden sharp- 
ness of a steeple puncturing a cloud." 14 Phallic heroism is presented vari- 
ously in terms of a cannon, a dagger, a pile driver, an iron bar. The mac's 
very body is an erection, and even in infancy, toughs like Querelle can survey 
buildings in a landscape with naive satisfaction, proud "at knowing so high 
a tower is the symbol of his virility." 16 As with many of the married couples 
whom Rainwater studied, sexuality is directed toward the male organ, 
thought to be the real actor and the purpose of coitus. 18 Since the male has 
so little interest in her pleasure, the queen, like traditional woman, rarely 
enjoys orgasm. Macs hardly ever condescend to jerk off a queen, and Divine 
is forced to finish in the toilet, place of excrement and shame. But like a the- 
atrical whore or a dutiful wife, the queen groans and faints to convert her 
suffering to the appearance of joy. 

Although "straight" society may be affronted at the thought, homosexual 
art is by no means without insights into heterosexual life, out of whose milieu 
it grows and whose notions it must, perforce, imitate and repeat, even parody. 

13 Quoted in Sartre, op, cit., p. 123. 

"Ifcjd., p. m. 

1B Jean Genet, Querelle de Brest QOeuvres Completes, Tome III, Paris, Galliniard, 

1953), p. 197- 
16 Lee Rainwater, And the Poor Get Children (Chicago: Quadrangle, i960). 



343 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Humanly judged, one is as perverse as the other; their pasts nearly identical 
their politics eminently reasonable facsimiles. As Benjamin De Mott has 
pointed out," Williams and Albee can say as much, and often speak more 
frankly than others about the horrors of family life, the tedium of marriage 
the lover's exploitation of personality, the slow erosion of character in pro- 
miscuity. h 

The hostility which the swish provokes from a crowd of college boys and 
toughs, their taunts, their desire to strike down, their mindless rage, is as 
one critic observes, 18 the uneasy response of insecure virility erupting into 
violence to cover its own terror of a possible "false self," which according 
to the Freudian theory of bisexuality, is its hateful and sternly throttled fem- 
ininity. Yet is not this very "assertion of masculinity" patently an expression 
not only of the vandal's zealous heterosexual orthodoxy, his perfervid jingoist 
commitment to "normal" sexual behavior-but just as much a statement of 
contempt for the feminine itself? 

For Genet's pimps and macs, the queen acts as a scapegoat for their own 
homosexual impulses, but also serves as the thing they hurt in retaliation for 
the horrified presentiment that their own natures might be tainted with what 
they palpably know is inferior, grostesque, female. The mayhem of the re- 
pressed homosexual is nicely demonstrated in Botchako's taunting a jerk in 
the prison yard: "I expected to see him strike the poor bastard, who didn't 
dare to make a movement, not even of fear. He instinctively assumed the 
sudden, shifty, prudent immobility of a frightened animal. Had Botchako 
made a single move to strike, he might have killed him, for he would not 
have been able to check his fury." 16 Botchako is only a crasher. The response 
of his superior, the pimp Lou Daybreak, is an amused "Go on, marry him! 
You're in love with him. Anyone can see it!" 20 The hero of Querelle of Brest, 
at the outset a militant heterosexual, is propositioned by a fairy, goes to his 
room and strangles him: 

Finally, if a queer was like this, a creature so light, so fragile, so airy, so trans- 
parent, so delicate, so broken, so clear, so garrulous, so musical, so tender-one 
could kill it. Since it was made to be killed; like Venetian glass it waited only 
the big tough fist which could smash it without even being cut (save possibly 
for an insidious sliver, sharp, hypocritical, slitting and remaining under the 
skin). If this was a queer, it wasn't a man. For the queer had no weight. He 
was a little cat, a bullfinch, a fawn, a blind-worm, a dragonfly, whose very 

"Benjamin De Mott, 'But He's a Homosexual . . » The New American Review, 
Number I (New York: New American' Library, September 1967). 
« George Dennison, "The Moral Effect of the Legend of Genet," ihid. 

19 Genet, The Miracle of the Rose, p. 20. Genet explains that Botchako's forehead 
was too narrow to contain enough reason to stop his anger once it got going." Ihid. 

20 Ibid., p. 22. 



JEAN GENET 343 

fragility is provocative and, in the end, it is precisely this exaggeration which 
inevitably invites its death. 21 

What Querelle is annihilating is an abstraction of the weak and the con- 
temptible, the feminine. In punishment for this murder, indeed, as atone- 
ment, Genet causes Querelle to become the catamite of a brothel boss. 

But as she minces along a street in the Village, the storm of outrage an 
insouciant queen in drag may call down is due to the fact that she is both 
masculine and feminine at once— or male, but feminine. She has made gender 
identity more than frighteningly easy to lose, she has questioned its reality 
at a time when it has attained the status of a moral absolute and a social 
imperative. She has defied it and actually suggested its negation. She has 
dared obloquy, and in doing so has challenged more than the taboo on homo- 
sexuality, she has uncovered what the source of this contempt implies— the 
fact that sex role is sex rank. 

In The Thief's Journal, Genet lived as a satellite to Stilitano, a dim but 
virile one-armed bandit whose life's ambition is to be "the conquering hero 
of the comic books." 22 Serving the master by assuming the burden of dan- 
gerous trips across national borders with packets of opium, Genet reports that 
he acted "out of obedience, out of submission to a sovereign Power." 23 "It's 
perfectly natural," I said to myself. "He's a prick and I'm a cunt." 24 An op- 
erating pimp, Stilitano also runs a woman, the prostitute Sylvia, and so has 
two "cunts" in his service, Genet being the second. When a biological male 
is described as a "cunt," one gets a better notion of the meaning of the word. 
By revealing its primarily status or power definition, Genet has demonstrated 
the utterly arbitrary and invidious nature of sex role. Divorced from their 
usual justification in an assumed biological congruity masculine and feminine 
stand out as terms of praise and blame, authority and servitude, high and 
low, master and slave. 

II 

And of course there is something infinitely ironic in Genet's use of the 
terms, for as both his groups are male, role now appears more than simply 
arbitrary, it is revealed as the category, even the function of a nakedly op- 
pressive social system. Particulars of status are observed with such excess of 
zeal, such tribal rigidity, that the final impression is humorous. Genet's own 
attitude fluctuates between obsequious acceptance and tongue-in-cheek mock- 
ery so that the total effect is satiric, and increasingly so as the oblique parody 
one finds in his prose fiction develops into direct statement in the plays, 

21 Jean Genet, Querelle de Brest. Since the Grove edition is not yet issued, and 
the British Streathem translation virtually unobtainable, I have supplied ray own trans- 
lation from the 1947 Paris edition. 

22 Genet, The Thief's Journal, p. 125. 
2S Ibid., p. 127. 

2* Ibid., p. 128. 



1 r 



344 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



where a feminine or oppressed mentality is extended to tie other political 
contexts of race, class, and colony. 

In the novels, Genet is forever arranging things so that his own feminine 
last shall be first, shall triumph somehow, even if it be the victory of despair 
and martyrdom. His queens embrace their lowliness with such fervor they 
convert it to grandeur, like those "Daughters of Shame" the Carolinas, a 
transvestite horde who march abroad in the streets of Barcelona, their "ex- 
travagant gestures" but a method to "pierce the shell of the world's con- 
tempt." 25 Through the miracle of Genet's prose (."my victory is verbal") 28 
the masochism consonant with their role as slaves is converted to the aura of 
sainthood. How else does the good woman traditionally excel except through 
suffering? The church has, in fact, supplied Genet with an extremist solu- 
tion to the lunatic pecking order of his world; 

The sacred surrounds and enslaves us . . . The Church is sacred. Its slow 
rites, weighted down with gold like Spanish galleons, ancient in meaning, re- 
mote from spirituality, gave it an empire as earthly as that of beauty and that of 
nobility. Culafroy . . . unable to escape this potency, abandoned himself to it 
voluptuously, as he would have done to Art had he known it! 27 

Genet has art at his command and can effect through it the very transforma- 
tion to nobility which Culafroy desires. Metamorphosed into Divine by the 
uncanny changes of faggotry, the miraculous is no longer beyond Louis' 
reach. Nor is art. Betrayed by her lovers, baited by hooligans, Divine invents 
a miniature painting on her fingernails; a tragic actress, she defies insult and 
forestalls criticism through bravura, calling herself a whorish old whore, 28 
knowing there is no worse that can be said of her. An aged and fallen queen, 
the butt mocked even in fag hangouts, her pearl coronal broken and strewn 
upon the floor, Divine rallies the absurd courage to proclaim, "Dammit ladies, 
I'll be queen anyhow!" 29 ingeniously replacing the paste with her dental 
bridge, her crown of thorns. "Hewn of tears," 30 the grim farce of her life has 
become her defense against the derision of the world. The most splendid char- 
acter in all his novels, Genet has provided a place for her "among the Elect." 
The martyred saint attracts Genet particularly, for unlike the scientist, the 
general, the industrialist, this is a hero who may be a heroine, and to the 
Gallic imagination this has perhaps a special likelihood, its own patron and 
national hero a woman "in drag" burned for a witch. In Genet's "eternal 

25 Ibid., p. 65. 
™Ibid., p. 59. 

27 Genet, Out Lady of the Flowers, p. r 94. 

28 Ibid., see p. 116. 

29 Ibid., p. 193. 
*IW., p. 194, 



JEAN GENET 345 

couple of the criminal and the saint," 31 mac and queen, saint naturally takes 
the feminine form, "la sainte." For the mac provides only a body, the queen 
is the soul. Genet's feminine conquest is a matter of overcoming rank with 
the miracle of spirit. Here he is merely following the paradoxical logic of 
folk Christianity, as, in the eyes of God, a withered hag shines brighter than 
a king. Describing his place of sorrows, the Barrio Chino, Spain's most odious 
slum, Genet explains how 

... my life as a beggar familiarized me with the stateliness of abjection, for it 
took a great deal of pride (that is, of love) to embellish those filthy despised 
creatures. It took a great deal of talent . . . Never did I try to make of it some- 
thing other than it was, I did not try to adorn it, to mask it, but on the contrary, 
I wanted to affirm it in its exact sordidness, and the most sordid signs became 
for me signs of grandeur. 32 

When he is arrested for vagrancy, the Vaseline found in his possession is 
but another sign of utter degradation because it only makes him more pansy, 
more vile in the view of the police and the secular world whose judgment 
they represent. It is for this reason more precious to him, stigmata both banal 
and triumphant. Associating it with his mother, also a prostitute, and 
overcome with the shame and tenderness both evoke, Genet claims "I would 
indeed rather have shed blood rather than repudiate the silly object," "its 
mere presence would be able to exasperate all the police in the world." 33 
Christianity, the religion of the inferiority complex (humility) carried to the 
lengths of the Untouchable, transmutes this to beatitude. Casually jettison- 
ing the ballast of its ethic, Genet has pirated its myth, content to prove that 
saintliness only means "turning pain to good account." 34 

But Genet's faith is incomplete, flawed by ironic analysis. Receiving the 
Eucharist, he experiences "nausea," tasting also "the magnificent structure of 
the laws in which I am caught," 35 his fine and jaundiced eye remarking the 
icons of the Virgin in police stations. Completely removed from the bourgeois 
world, he can observe its totalist character, aware of how crime and the law 
are but each other's shadow. "Excluded by . . . birth and tastes from the 
social order," Genet went on to dare to "touch" it by "insulting those who 
composed it." 30 Louis Culafroy, child of a French village as Genet himself 
was, experiments with the sacred only to find it empty. Mounting the altar 

31 Jean Genet, The Maids, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman (New 
York: Grove, 1954, 1961), p. 63. 

32 Genet, The Thief's Journal, p. 19. 

33 Ibid., p. 22. 
S* Ibid., p. aoj. 
35 Ibid., p. 173. 
Mlbid., p. 182. 



346 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



of a deserted church and desecrating the host, he waits for the supernatural 
to assert itself by a sign: 

And the miracle happened. There was no miracle. God had been debunked, 
God was hollow. Just a hole with any old thing around it. A pretty shape like 
the plaster head of Marie Antoinette and the litde soldiers, which were holes 
with a bit of thin lead around them. 37 

Replacing this discredited god with crime and virility, Genet must also 
find it hollow. The faces of his eminent killers, the heroes of the guillotine 
are really "vacant-eyed," "like the windows of buildings under construction 
through which you can see the sky." 38 Godlike in his world of fiction and 
fantasy, Genet has contrived it that the pimp is a creature pretematurally 
stupid, for with a revenge truly feminine he has undermined his masters by 
turning upon them with the one insult woman has traditionally resorted to 
in calling her lord a fool. Divine is often a burlesque of femininity, 
celebrating July 14 in a way all her own, marking the day when the coun- 
try is decked in the red, white, and blue of the tricolor, by tricking herself 
out in "all the other colors, out of consideration for them because they are 
disdained." But the cruel males whom she serves and Genet hymns are only 
window-dressing dummies, fetishes of masculinity, rather than men. 39 

Genet's pseudo- or antireligion of homosexuality and crime has a third ele- 
ment in its trinity— betrayal. Although his role calls for perfect loyalty, he 
delights in the perfidious, 40 a subversive even in his own realm, so full of 
feminine guile that he corrupts and feminizes everything within reach, as- 
sociating convicts with flowers, transforming the killer Harcamone's heraldic 
chains and handcuffs into a network of roses, unmanning superman. Darling 
was sadly mistaken in his expectation of becoming a "double male." After 
a few years with Divine, the mighty pimp is as effeminate as his mistress. 
Adrien Baillon, a promising young tough, is so infected by a brief cohabita- 
tion with Divine that he comes to be "Our Lady of the Flowers," consents to 
attend a party in drag, and becomes a girl queen the same night. 

Under Divine's influence even Seek Gorgui, her hulking he-man lover, is 
softened. In the magnificent set piece where the three (Seek, Our Lady, 
Divine) return bedraggled from their revels through the early morning streets, 
Seek succumbs to an infatuation with Our Lady. The eternally rejected 
woman, Divine has already lost her man by the time they catch a cab. Genet, 
underlining a rare event, first advises us to "bear in mind that a pimp never 

37 Genet, Our Lady of the Flowers, p. 174. 

38 Ibid., pp. 52-53. 

89 Ibid., p. 105. Thody also comments on the "fetish" quality of Genet's males. 

40 See Funeral Rites (soon to be released in translation by Grove). Genet's delight 
in betraying France calls to mind a common feminine response in wartime— vide the geisha 
in Japan, the women of occupied Berlin and Paris. But the sort of betrayal Genet in- 
dulges in here is rather hard to forgive, and the novel disappointingly puerile. 



JEAN GENET 347 

effaces himself before a woman, still less before a faggot," and then describes 
how Seek, who, according to pecking order, should enter the taxi first, per- 
mits Our Lady to precede him. 41 This unique instance of chivalry is but 
effeminacy in Seek; a sign of regard for his new favorite utterly out of char- 
acter in one of his station. 

Owr Lady of the Flowers was composed in prison while Genet was await- 
ing trial. The book is one long wish-fulfillment. It would seem that malice 
alone prompted him to invent the fantasy-figure called Ma rchetti— merely 
that he might be revenged on this handsome male by condemning him to a 
life sentence. "The charm that subjugates, the iron hand in the velvet glove," 
the absolute "Beauty" which inspires him to gush, "I am touched at the 
thought of it and could we weep with tenderness over his handsome mus- 
cles" is first paraded before us only that Genet may, with stunning acrimony, 
exterminate it; 

Marchetti will remain between four white walls to the end of ends ... It 
will be the death of Hope ... I am very glad of it. Let this arrogant and hand- 
some pimp in turn know the torments reserved for the weakly. 42 



Gloating over the fate he has bestowed upon "the pimp, the lady-killer, the 
hangman of hearts," Genet addresses his creature with exquisite venom, 
"Your turn Marchetti . . . enjoy it as you can, deep in your cell. For I hate 
you lovingly." 43 

A spitefulness lurks within femininity, here defined not as the property 
of "a female in a skirt," but as a matter of "submission to the imperious 
male."' 14 Genet's malevolence is a stubborn heresy cherished despite his self- 
proclaimed system of adulation, a lurking intractability. Slavelike, it shows 
itself in petty acts of betrayal and bitchiness. Refusing to accept the honor 
of a puff from the cigarette Botchako offers him, Genet, a mere fairy putting 
down a manly crasher, experiences a "triumphal moment." 45 The fag laughs 
at the mac behind his back. Just as he first rebelled from the social judgment 
of thief by embracing crime and converting it by "certain laws of a fictional 
aesthetic" 40 into his own version of evil as good, Genet has chosen to rebel 
from the ignominy of "cunt" status by creating tantes who transcend and 
outdistance their overbearing males. 

Inscribing a copy of a book for a friend "Jean Genet, the weakest of all 
and the strongest" 47 he reveals he has always been a clerk among barons, a 

41 Genet, Our Lady of the Flowers, p. 224. 

42 Ibid., pp. 184-85. 
"Ibid., p. 186. 

44 Ibid., p. 235. 

46 Genet, The Miracle of the Rose, p. 220. 
48 Genet, The Thief's Journal. 

47 Sartre, op. cit., reports to have seen this inscription in a copy of Pompes Funebres 
(Funeral Rites). 



348 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



part of him forever supercilious, aloof, and superior to the heroes he turns 
into poetry, donating gratis "those virtues they themselves never possess," 48 
knowing full well they are but overgrown bullies, clods, moronic adolescents. 
Their lawlessness, celebrated to appall the bourgeoisie whom Genet hates 
with a hatred more bitter and unrelenting than that of other contemporary 
French intellectuals (and with greater cause), is finally only the mugs' own 
bungled defeat before the fatalities of their class and education. But the Big 
Shots are cruel, and their masculine harshness, a stylized elaboration of the 
prevailing brutality of the world, makes them his enemies as well as his allies, 
his oppressors as well as his lovers. 

The queen is continuously trying to absorb and become these lovers, to 
assume their superiority as Mimosa II swallows a photograph of Our Lady 
'like a host." Genet reveals the comic error in penis envy: to say he is infected 
is a gross understatement— possessing a penis, he has power envy. The very 
fellatio which is the queen's role and insignia of servitude is converted to a 
kind of castration rite wherein the pimp's hardness ("with Gorgui all is 
hard") is overcome by softness ("Divine is she-who-is-soft"). 49 

An insight into the strangely subjective character of sexual power is con- 
tained in this brief description: 

From the way he talks, the way he lights and smokes his cigarette, Divine 
gathered that Darling is a pimp. At first she had ceitain fears: of being beaten 
up, robbed, insulted. Then she felt the proud satisfaction of having -made a 



pimp come. 



so 



In a conversion typical of slave psychology, Divine perceives the situation 
as one in her control, quite as the male imagines it is in his. Darling believes 
he had made Divine suck him off: Divine persists in the belief she had made 
Darling come. Caught in a power trap, each believes he/she is in command. 
The slave's manipulation of his master may distort, abridge— but never cancel 
—the distinction between them. Nor does it abolish slavery as an institution. 
The final victory of Genet's subversive femininity is to cheat a spark of 
human affection out of the stony cliffs of virility. "What's eating you? Are 
you nuts or something?" 51 Armand grunts when Genet attempts to kiss his 
hairy arm. The mac is threatened, for he knows that fondness is feminine and 
can even make one vulnerable. By slow degrees be will be tricked into per- 
mitting egalitarian reciprocity, then need, and finally dependence. With in- 
sidious insubordination, Divine persists in telling Darling he is "pretty," un- 

48 Genet, The Thief's Journal, p. 23. Italics mine. 

48 Genet, Out Lady of the Flowers, p. 180. 

Wlbid., p. 79. Italics mine. I am gratefully indebted to Professor Richard Gustafson, 
not only for pointing out the ambiguity of this passage for me (my remark is but a 
paraphrase of his), but for a number of insights which I obtained from out conversations 
on Miller, Mailer, and Genet. 

61 Genet, Tfce Thief's Journal, p. 134. 



JEAN GENET 349 

til the pimp is so unnerved he takes on her gestures and even goes to work. 
Caught shoplifting, his freedom evaporates in his victimization by the law. 
He is feminine now, beaten. 

Genet's femininity is, as Sartre phrases it, a "hostile eroticism," 62 delighted 
to ridicule and betray the very myth of virility it pretends to serve. By ex- 
posing virility's cowardice, its oppressive resemblance to the official adult 
world, the unfriendly society it mimics, his art is revenge springing out of 
"a humiliated adolescent's amorous hatred of the handsome big shots at 
Mettray" who first stigmatized him as feminine. 63 Like most of those restless 
in servitude, resentful of opprobrium, Genet has the little person's retaliation 
of derision and clever calumny. 

But to be a rebel is not to be a revolutionary. It is more often but a way of 
spinning one's wheels deeper in the sand. Genet's hero criminals who achieve 
their martyr's crown at the guillotine murder inoffensive persons only that 
they may themselves be judged and murdered in return, leaving the system 
not only intact but actually stronger, for the lumpen proletariat has had its 
moment of symbolic self-expression through a vicarious participation in a 
pointless antisocial act, has enjoyed the execution also, maybe even more, and 
is now ready to become docile once again. And Divine's saintliness, her 
martyrdom, is only the destructive impulse, the masochism of her role car- 
ried to its fulfillment in self-immolation. Hers is the moral victory of true 
faith, but it is not freedom. 

Ill 

Because it did not cover Genet's last three plays, Sartre's biography leaves 
its subject still a rebel, failing to report his final metamorphosis into revolu- 
tionary. With The Balcony, The Blacks, and The Screens, we have a new 
Genet evolved beyond the imperfect subversive Sartre saw in the novels, 
Deathwatch, and The Maids. Genet's originally subjective antisocialism has 
gradually taken an objective form in the theater, aiming toward what he 
states in a recent essay to be his final ambition— namely, to disappear behind 
his work. 54 While irony increases, romantic myth drops away, and with it, 
that dichotomy between the two one finds in his earlier works, particularly 
the wonderfully urbane and self-conscious Thief's Journal. It is a feature of 
The Miracle of the Rose as well, which alternates between exaggerated cele- 
brations of the prison world and jaded expressions of how "disillusioned" and 
bored with it Genet is becoming. Perhaps the very pitch of ironic attitude is 
reached in L'Enfant Criminel, a radio talk where, in the manner of a modest 
proposer, Genet urges greater inhumanity in reformatories, that youthful 

S 2 Sartre, op. cit., p. 153. 
S3 lbid., p. 149. 

84 Jean Genet, "The Funambulists," translated from the French by Bernard Frecht- 
man, Evergreen Review, No. 3a, April-May 1964, pp. 45-49- 



¦^r 



350 SEXUAL POLITICS 

offenders may "keep in touch with the revolt that makes them so beautiful." 5 * 

To advance past rebellion Genet is forced to discard the remnants of his 
ironic and paradoxical faith, for the step from rebellion to revolution is a 
step beyond nostalgia (for what one has known and hated and enjoyed de- 
facing) toward the creation of new alternate values. Rebels can be "con- 
tained'-cspecially if they are sentimental ones. 

The idea of "femininity" as presented in the novels: abject abdicating 
martyrdom, broken by an undercurrent of sedition, takes a new course in 
the late works for the theater, becoming an attitude of rebellious intransi- 
gence, which with Genet's expanding sympathy and humanity, his increas- 
ing interest in politics, grows into an identification with oppressed groups of 
both sexes: maids, blacks, Algerians, proles, all those who are in the feminine 
or subordinate role toward capital, racism, or empire. 58 The negative aspect 
of femininity as a slave mentality is now one which its victims struggle against 
with increasing fury, at first with futile self-destructiveness in The Maids, 
then with growing understanding and success in each succeeding play. 

Oppression creates a psychology in the oppressed, Marxism, though adroit 
at analyzing the economic and political situation of such persons, has often 
neglected, perhaps out of nervous dismay, to notice how thoroughly the op- 
pressed are corrupted by their situation, how deeply they envy and admire 
their masters, how utterly they are polluted by their ideas and values, how 
even their attitude toward themselves is dictated by those who own them. 
Genet has been a servant. When he states that servants are the "seamy side 
of their masters," their "unwholesome exhalations," 57 and his maids, deep in 
self-disdain, refer to themselves as each other's "bad smell," 08 he is describing 
a very real social and psychological phenomenon. His mature plays are 
studies in what one might call the colonial or feminine mentality of interi- 
orized oppression which must conquer itself before it can be free. 

The maids fail. Weighted down with self-hatred, their favorite game is 
really not to play at murdering their mistress, but to play at being her. The 
second game is so much more exciting that they never get around to the first. 
In the end, Claire, the more gentle and Divine-like of the two, drinks poison 

66 The talk was never given as the liberal prison reformers who were the other guests 
refused to show up. I am using Thody's translation of the phrase. The talk has been 
printed together with Genet's ballet, Adame Miroir. Jean Genet, L'Enfant Criminal 
(Paris: Paul Morihien, 1949). 

66 To argue as Richard Coe has done in The Vision of Jean Genet that Genet was 
undergoing a process which Coe calls "virilization" and identifies with freedom, self- 
realization, art, and every other good thing, is nonsense. Were such the case, Genet's 
plays should have sided with the powers that be, which all his life he had seen as mas- 
culine. By analogy, the transition from "niggerization" to black military is hardly a process 
of becoming white. Coe's terms explain his assumptions. See Richard N. Coe, The 
Vision of Jean Genet (New York: Grove, 1968). 

BT Genet, The Miracle of the Rose, p. 106. 

68 Genet, The Maids, p. 61. 



JEAN GENET 351 

so that the more craven and "masculine" maid, Solange, may pretend to a 
murder, enjoy the guillotine, and relish a tabloid notoriety. The play's raw 
material was the case of the Papin sisters, Lea and Christine, who killed their 
mistress and her daughter at Le Mans in 1933, capturing the popular imagina- 
tion in their gory wake. Genet has made extensive changes in his treatment 
of the events, underlining the futility of the insurrection by leaving the em- 
ployers untouched, and eliminating the daughter to add Monsieur, Madame's 
lover, the Man at the pinnacle of the hierarchy, who never appears, although 
he is referred to continuously, and exerts enormous authority over all three 
women from off stage. Madame claims to be his slave, and when the maids try 
to get him arrested by writing letters to the police, Madame rejoices in the 
melodramatic prospect of following him to Siberia. 

The Maids is a study of female jealousy and resentment at servile status. 
"Filth does not love filth" 89 Solange proposes, explaining why it is impos- 
sible for the maids to rebel or take concerted action together. "When slaves 
love one another, it's not love," 60 despising themselves, they despise each 
other, and there can be no solidarity between them, for like any well-trained 
women, they do not identify with each other but with males or with the rich 
like Madame. This is why Genet puts stress on the maids as proletarian 
as well as feminine, their immediate enemy their bourgeois mistress. 
Not until The Screens does Genet's identification with purely feminine cir- 
cumstances clearly and decisively emerge. 

Madame herself is kind, with the kindness of the comfortable middle class 
who can afford good manners. (To a lady who congratulated herself on giv- 
ing her maid her discarded dresses, Genet quietly replied, "How nice, and 
does she give you hers?") 61 But the maids, playing at being mistress to each 
other, are not nice. Outcasts in an emotional complicity with the ruling 
order, they invent insults ("Servants ooze." "They are not of the human 
race") 82 exposing the poisonous effect their declared inferiority (agreed upon 
by others and agreed to by themselves) has had upon them. So much do they 
believe in their superiors' edition of their lives, they cannot escape servitude 
save in self-laceration, and their revolt is only the criminal's folly which 
inevitably rebounds back upon itself. But here, in contrast to the novels, it 
is presented for the first time with explicitness devoid of romantic sentimen- 
tality. The maids' suffering is exquisite, but their oppression is too effective; 
out of their predicament as selves defined by another, there is as yet no exit. 

The Balcony, which concentrates on the political connotations of sex Tole 
as power, is another case of failed rebellion, but a great advance over the 
maids' claustral dilemma in that an actual revolution might have occurred 

M Ibid., p. 52, 

wihid., p. 61. 

Bl Sartre, op. cit., reports the anecdote on page 18. 

«2 Genet, The Maids, p. 86. 



352 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



if it had any alternate values to set up in place of the ancien regime it has 
temporarily destroyed. Armand names the problem: "I personally don't be- 
lieve in their masquerade, not one bit. But is there any stronger force to 
replace them?" 63 A history of belief and co-operation paralyzes one. In Car- 
men the prostitute, participation in masculine fantasy has created such iden- 
tification with the role that it becomes her reality; excused from the charade 
she craves those heady moments when she was The Immaculate Concep- 
tion of Lourdes to a bank clerk. In the same way, the participation of a whole 
populace in the ancient myths of the church, the law, and the army, bring 
about instantaneous capitulation when imposters standing in for these mem- 
bers of the "Nomenclature" are paraded through the city in state. Humanity 
is a bit infantilized, like the masochist in studio four who wishes only to be 
tied and spanked, so schooled in the old rites it loves them. 

The revolution degenerates to counterrevolution because, lacking a crea- 
tive alternative, the new order can only ape the old: "If we behave like those 
of the other side, then we are the other side," Roger, the most dedicated and 
intelligent of the rebels predicts, knowing that "instead of changing the 
world, all we'll achieve is a reflection of the one we want to destroy." 84 And 
so the popular upsurge, unaccompanied by any change of consciousness, can 
be merely a ccnvp d'etat, ending, as con-ps do, in a fascist junta. Illustrating the 
basic conventionality of the rebels, Genet again chooses to do it in terms of 
sexual role, through the conjunction of Chantal and Georgette. Though one 
is a fighter and the other a revolutionary intellectual, both are restricted to 
the stereotypic role of nursing the wounded. "That's a woman's job," 65 a 
casualty recites smugly. Chantal's only alternative is to be a singer or a whore; 
to entertain or arouse the male. When the cadre raffle her off like cattle auc- 
tioneers (twenty ordinary women for Chantal) she performs the role allowed 
her and in the process helps corrupt the revolution. La Passionara is a figure 
full of romance, but one woman does not make a revolution, and one of the 
better tests of an actual revolution (as opposed to rebellion, riot, civil war, 
nationalist war, etc.) is the degree to which the female population partici- 
pates. 

Confusing sex with power in the same manner as their predecessors, the 
male rebels cease to think, and the uprising turns into an orgy of "shoot and 
screw," "one hand on the trigger, the other on the fly." 66 Of course they fail — 
a carnival that goes to the limit is suicide." 07 Having nothing new to say, 
the insurrectionists fall into traditional follies regarding sex and power, sex 
and violence. Females are goddesses or packhorses as of old; nurses, bitches 

63 Jean Genet, The Balcony, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman (New 
York: Grove, 1958), p. 67. 
04 Ibid., p. 56. 
68 lhid., p. 60. 
fls Ibid., p. 59. 
« Ibid. 



JEAN GENET 353 

or whores, and males the familiar pack of mindless slaughterers, inspired not 
by freedom but by sexual delusion. A right-wing master politico who sur- 
vives every rumble, the Envoy puts it neatly: "At first people were fighting 
against illustrious and illusory tyrants, then for freedom. Tomorrow they'll 
be ready to die for Chantal alone." 68 When the whistle blows, guilt and 
confusion find them at their stations, bowing before the customary notions 
of law and order represented by three dolls in lace and braid, the estab- 
lishment's Justice, Piety, and Valor. Devoid of transforming ideas, they have 
earned their failure, and the police state closes in upon them, inexorable 
before Roger's suicidal gesture of literally castrating himself, a naive bit of 
imitative magic, masochist as the maid's poisoned teacup, since it leaves the 
Chief of Police intact, sexually impotent as ever, but probably capable of 
ruling from his tomb with the truly powerful mythic phallus of fear. Caught 
in the toils of the sexual power game, rebel hope is "screwed" again. 

In stipulating that the roles in The Maids be played by young men, Genet 
was not primarily indulging in a gay joke, but only, as Sartre observes, pre- 
senting "femininity without women," 88 an abstraction, a state of mind. Since 
"nigger," like "cunt" is a status word to him, Genet employed a similar device 
with regard to black and white in The Blacks," 10 where he chose to have 
black actors ("behind the mask of a corner white is a poor trembling 
Negro") 71 represent the White Court who judge the ritual murder of white- 
ness as performed by another group of blacks, the Players. Since their situa- 
tion in white culture makes them relative beings or mirrors of white ideas, 
the blacks seek to "entertain" their projected audience in the White Court, 
as well as an actual paying audience of Caucasians 72 with the one black 
act of greatest interest to the white, the brutal rape and murder of "his 
woman." This farce, whose function is to release black animosity, edify 
whites with a caricature of their bogeys, and affront them by a parody of 
their power establishment (the White Court) is, in fact, only a diversion 
from the real action, the beginning of an organized black revolution, in- 
augurated by the purge of Uncle Torn. 73 The probable traitor, Reverend 

08 Ibid., p, 77. 

68 Sartre, op. cit., p. 656. 

70 Jean Genet, The Blacks, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman (New 
York: Grove, 1960). The French title hes Negres is closer to "nigger" than to "black." 

™ Ibid., p. 58. 

72 "This play, written, I repeat, by a white man, is intended for a white audience, 
but if, which is unlikely, it is ever performed before a black audience, then a white 
person, male or female, should be invited every evening. The organizer of the show 
should welcome him formally, dress him in ceremonial costume and lead him to his seat, 
preferably in the front row of the orchestra. The actors will play for him." Prefatory 
note to The Blacks. 

7S The play succeeded here splendidly. The only French or English critic who ever 
saw the real plot in early productions was Guy Leclerc of L'Humaniti (Paris: November 
i959)- 



354 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Samba Graham Diouf is a compromiser undermined by the "kindness of the 
whites" into a "guilty meekness" 74 and full of hopeful proposals for a gray or 
gingerbread Eucharist. The blacks' own humorous solution is to make him 
the ritual victim of their rite and dispatch him to the "nigger heaven" of 
whiteness. Perched up on a tier there with the White Court, he can look 
down from his new eminence and report that "either they lie or they're mis- 
taken"— whites are in fact "pink or yellowish." 75 

The Blacks will not perish through the same error as The Balcony's rebels, 
for they have invented alternative values. Against the absolute value of 
white in Western culture, which has appropriated everything from God to 
cleanliness, they assert the power of black. In a prefatory note Genet asks 
"what exactly is a black? First of all, what's his color?"— a conundrum which 
implies both that color is irrelevant to common humanity, and secondly, that 
blackness is the route to revolution in a white supremacy. There is no in- 
superable contradiction here, for revolution would scarcely be a necessity 
to blacks as blacks, without the politicization white has effected upon black 
by basing its oppression on racial pigmentation— on blackness. In order to 
escape the identity their masters have given them, the blacks must first objec- 
tify it. They accomplish this by ridicule and exaggeration, the "niggerish- 
ness" 76 of their boot-blacking make-up, two-toned shoes, and flashy dresses. 
Next they must develop the identity of their own choice, for Genet is correct 
in assuming that the emergence of a positive collective identity precedes 
revolutionary awareness and marks the difference between it and point- 
less uprisings which only spin back into further reaction. 

The Blacks is a turning point in Genet's exegesis of the politics and psy- 
chology of oppression, marking a move away from defeated self-hate to dig- 
nity and self-definition. And, finally, to rage. Blacks, colonials, women, all 
prisoners of definitions imposed on them by others, must, if they are not to 
become the victims of their own self-loathing (like 'he maids) or of their 
traditional illusions (like the people of The Balcony') find freedom by an 
angry assertion of selfhood and solidarity. Exploring the vexed and compli- 
cated problem of sexual and racial politics, Genet suggests that whites have 
divided blacks, as the colons did the Algerians, by introducing or capitalizing 
upon a variety of sexual hostility which provides a particular set of advan- 
tages for white ends. Among the blacks this has been effected by the proposi- 
tion that the white master's aesthetic is embodied in "his woman," a bit of 
property he advertises so that it might be coveted, coveted so that the act 

7 * Genet, The Blacks, p. 33. 

73Ifcii.,p.89. 

7B In this context perhaps a better word than negritude. I heard it explained by 
Richard Richard, a black painter who based an aesthetic on it and described it in 
terms of Harlem interiors, pink chenille bedspreads, fancy table lamps and enthusiastically 
striped slip covers. All through his work Genet too has made an aesthetic out of "bad 
taste," e.g., the accoutrements of the poor. 



JEAN GENET 



355 



may be punished. Meanwhile the black woman is imprisoned as her master's 
whore— "Every brothel has its negress," 77 "I make my troops tear off a piece 
every Saturday," 78 the White Governor chuckles. 

For the white distorts love and sexuality in his subjects, forcing the black 
male to accept both the white woman's beauty, and scorn of the black woman. 
"I hate you," Village confesses to Virtue. "I began to hate you when every 
thing about you would have kindled love and when love would have made 
men's contempt unbearable." 79 Unable to "bear the weight of the world's 
condemnation," he has shared its disdain. Exorcising the myth which has 
bewitched them, the black lovers must first repudiate the white fallacy that 
the female is an aesthetic object and that beauty itself is white. Until this 
lie goes, Village cannot love Virtue, Charley's despised prostitute, who, of 
all the blacks, is "the only one who experiences shame to the bitter end." 80 
The signal of the play's victory is his final acceptance of her. 

Sounding the very depths of the colonial attitude, Genet demonstrates how 
the inability to accept the black woman is tantamount to a kind of self-hatred 
infecting the whole race. "Stately mother of my race . . . you are Africa, oh 
monumental night, and I hate you," 81 Village bursts out. Felicity, the Black 
Queen, and the spirit of Africa, the matriarch who challenges and defeats 
the figurehead of the White Queen, is in fact the mother of this race: its fu- 
ture depends on its ability to come to terms with its origin,- to identify with 
its negritude, the alternative value which will save it from the destructive 
standards of whiteness. In Felicity's magnificent evocations of Africa, the 
force and magic of an entire continent is gathered : 

Dahomey! Dahomey! Negroes from all corners of the earth, to the rescue! Come! 
Enter into me . . . Swell me with your tumult! . . . Penetrate where you will, 
my mouth, my ears— or my nostril . . . Giantess with head thrown back, I 
await you all. Enter into me, ye multitudes, and be, for this evening only, my 
force and reason . . , 

Tribes covered with gold and mud, rise up from my body, emerge! Tribes of 
the Rain and Wind, forward! Princes of the Upper Empires, Princes of the bare 
feet and wooden stirrups, on your caparisoned horses, enter! . . . Are you there, 
Africa with the bulging chest and oblong thigh? Sulking Africa, wrought of 
iron, in the fire, Africa of the millions of royal slaves, deported Africa, drifting 
continent, are you there? Slowly you vanish, you withdraw into the past, into 
the tales of castaways, colonial museums, the works of scholars, but I call you 
back this evening to attend a secret revel. 82 



" Genet, The Blacks, p. 38. 
™ Ibid., p. 78. 
70 lhid., p. 36. 

80 11m*., p. 38. 

81 Ibid., pp. 36—37. 

82 Ibid., pp. 46 and 76. 



™1 f 



356 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Having made the world in the image of whiteness, white rule proposed its 
own narcissism as an absolute against which blackness, unable to conform, 
can only be defined as deviate, inferior. Against this myth, the anger of the 
black women is fiercest of all: "We, the negro women, we had only our 
wrath and rage," 83 they seethe. Most oppressed of all, dismissed as a "tame 
captive" 84 even by men of her own kind, men whom they must ever suspect 
of desire for the whites' own ideal decorative feminine nonentity, the fury 
of women like Bobo or Snow is scarcely under control. "From far off, from 
Ubangi or Tanganyika, a tremendous love came here to die licking white 
ankles," 85 Snow accuses Village, her distrust and resentment puncturing 
the ritual surface of the black mass with psychodrama. The real force of 
hate, the rock-bottom determination of the blacks lies with the women, who 
are not tempted like Diouf to sell out for the public office of "spokes- 
man," or like Village, for the moonshine of white romance. At the bottom 
of the racial-sexual totem there is only one place to go. Archibald, the master 
of ceremonies, exhorts his players: "Negroes, if they change toward us let 
it be not out of indulgence, but terror," but he has no need to incite the 
women, only to restrain them. They are constantly transcending the ritual 
denunciation their role demands and breaking out into actual fierceness. 
Snow tears and bites the flowers which bedeck the catafalque, an act not 
called for in the rite and one rebuked as "needless cruelty." 86 Here, just 
as in The Screens, Genet has placed the most fearful revolutionary passion 
in the women. 

Alone of our contemporary writers, Genet has taken thought of women as 
an oppressed group and revolutionary force, and chosen to identify with 
them. His own peculiar history, his analysis of expropriated peoples, in- 
evitably lead Genet to empathize with what is scorned, relative, and sub- 
jugated. Each of his last plays incorporates the sexual into political situa- 
tions: in The Balcony it is power and sex, in The Blacks, race and sex, 
in The Screens, sexual rank and the colonial mentality. Lawrence, Miller, 
and Mailer, identify woman as a annoying minority force to be put down 
and are concerned with a social order in which the female would be per- 
fectly controlled. Genet, however, has integrated her into a vision of dras- 
tic social upheaval where her ancient subordination can produce explosive 
force. And, in fact, in The Screens, it is the women who are the revolution. 

As the play opens the Arabs are immersed in a system of hierarchal 
situations; the European colon lords it over the Arab male, who vents his 
frustrations on his woman, who, if she is lucky, takes it out on her daughter- 
in-law. As the colon guards his fields with a mechanical glove suspended 

83 Ibid., p, 17, 

84 Ibid., p. 69. 

85 Ibid., p, 49, 
8a Ibid., p. 52. 



JEAN GENET 357 

in the air like a Blue Meaney, the Arab husband, during the hours of his 
absence, governs his females by means of his empty trousers. 87 

In the first scene Said, The Screens' anti-hero, is on his way to marry the 
"ugliest woman in the next town and all the towns around," 88 fuming that 
he is stuck with her: In the scale of capital and marriage values, his own 
poverty is presumed to match her ugliness. It's hard to tell if her face is a 
real or imagined catastrophe, since Leila the bride wears a black bag through- 
out the entire performance, stark evidence of her nonentity, enslavement, and 
exclusion from human experience. Said's mother, a traditional Arab woman, 
tags behind him carrying a valise of gewgaw wedding presents. A devout 
male supremacist, she is persuaded her son would "be less of a man" 89 if he 
were to condescend to come to her aid in public. Leila is Said's salvation as 
well as his fate; her very odium epitomizes the Arab's colonial situation. 
Scorning her with a ferocious ardor, Said becomes a dangerously disgruntled 
colonial. More an allegory than a character, Leila the loathed woman, is a 
symptom of the general degradation of the Arab world. If Said the Arab 
hates her, he hates himself, for no people are capable of self-respect, if, like 
Genet's Muslims, they so fervently despise half their own population. 

The folk humor of the ugly wife with which the play begins contains its 
central situation. Said's dissatisfaction brings him first to the brothel where 
the pariah prostitutes, creatures of a chiefly decorative function, assuage his 
native disaffection with mock- Western manners and ornate display. But even 
the house of illusions is not enough, and its essentially colonial character 
is explicit for both sexes: 

Mmtapha: The French were pretty annoyed about our fucking their whores. 
Warda: Did they let you do anything else? They didn't. So? Here what do 
you fuck? Us. fl0 

It is Said's very hatred of his own situation, not so much exacerbated, as 
summed up in his wife (who is his unrelenting -malheur, his unique misfor- 
tune, the contemptible odor that follows him like a shadow from trouble to 
jail to a life of total alienation) which becomes the fuse of the revolution. 
Said's strange discontent is potential political dynamite. 

But if Said becomes somewhat miraculously (in view of his determined 
apolitical nature) not only the model, but the "flag" of the revolution, its 
spirit and activity comes from a group of old village hags still more lowly 
than he. This is appropriate in Genet's scheme, a revolutionary politics 
whereby bottom dog should bark loudest. To the Arab male groaning under 

87 This actually happens. See scenes 3 and 4. Jean Genet, The Screens (New York: 
Grove, 1962). 
ss lbid., p. 12, 
89 Ibid., p. 13. 
bo Ibid., p. 20. 



358 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



foreign occupation, the women present a longer and more complete history 
of colonial resentment: 

Ommu: For a thousand years we women have put up with being your dish 
rags ... but for a hundred years, you've been dish rags; thanks to you 
the boots of those gentlemen have been a hundred thousand shinine 
suns . , . 81 s 

It is old Kadidja who screams out the first words of insurrection at a sedate 
Moslem civil gathering from which she is officially excluded: 

The Dignitary (wearing a fez and a blue, western-style suit with many decora- 
tions. Into the wings): Remain quiet. Everyone must be dignified. No children 
here. Nor women. 

Kadidja; Without women what would you be? A spot on your father's pants 
that three flies would have drunk up. 

The Dignitary: Go away, Kadidja. This isn't the day. 

Kadidja (furiously): It is! They accuse us and threaten us, and you want us to 
be prudent. And docile. And humble. And submissive. And ladylike. 
And honey- tongued. And sweet as pie. And silk veil. And fine ciga- 
rette. And nice kiss and soft spoken. And gentle dust on their red 
pumps! ... I won't! (She stamps her heel.) 

This is my town here. My bed is here. I was fucked fourteen times here 
and gave birth to fourteen Arabs. I won't go. 92 

And against the bumptious inanity of the landowner Sir Harold, it is Kadidja 
who cries out her people's first challenge-"! say that your force is powerless 
against our hatred." 93 In retaliation Kadidja is calmly shot down by the 
whites, whereupon (since The Screens is a surrealist dream play, its charac- 
ters popping in and out of life in the most disconcerting way) her ghost 
begins the revolution. 

It is little wonder The Screens incited a storm both in France and in Al- 
geria. Presented in government-subsidized theatre in a superb production by 
Jean-Louis Barrault's company, The Screens, as Philip Thody has remarked, 
satirizes the French army as a body of "incompetent and attitudinizing 
[latent] homosexuals, and the one hundred and thirty years of French pres- 
ence in Algeria as a totally ludicrous experience." 94 Broad, and often vulgar 
farce from start to finish, the play erupted into a riot when Genet's legion- 
naires patriotically farted "French air" in sober tribute over their lieutenant's 
corpse. In Algeria, The Screens is equally unpopular, for it accuses the 

»1 IfcttJ., p . 134. 

82 IJj«£,, pp. 50-91. 

» a Ibid., p. 96. 

91 Thody, vp. at., p. 206. 



JEAN GENET 359 

revolution of becoming the very pattern of its colonial predecessor, leav- 
ing the masses, Said and the women, as wretched as before. The last scenes 
are a duel between a group of prophetic matriarchs, grand in their poetic 
rage and their visions of an ongoing revolution, and the pale and automated 
males of the new order, carbon copies of their French enemy, bursting with 
narcissism and military discipline, la gloire, and the organized slaughter 
called valor. 

Obviously under Fanon's influence (probably via Sartre), 05 Genet is re- 
markably indulgent toward the violence the insurgents, both men and 
women, perpetrate in the terrorist stages of the uprising. One of the most 
impressive and frightening scenes in the play is the depiction, through draw- 
ings after drawing upon the screens, of the atrocities the guerrillas commit. 
As screen after screen fills with blood and fire, Kadidja, the first martyr and 
presiding figure of the insurrection, pronounces her unrelenting hatred and 
satisfaction at the human sacrifice. Genet's justification would doubtless be 
that oppression rightly seeks revenge, a stupid argument however fashion- 
able. Violence of itself accomplishes nothing that revolutions are created to 
accomplish: in fact, it is likely to be the leading counterrevolutionary symp- 
tom, as Genet himself demonstrated in The Balcony. As means to the end of 
social justice, revolutionary crime is self defeating since it merely replaces 
older oppression and inequity with new. 

But Genet's contempt for military murder is quite a different affair. In the 
lieutenant of the French legionnaires, he has created a splendid caricature 
career officer, an idiotic martial narcissist ("Let every man be a mirror to 
every other man") 6e a Maileresque case of repressed homosexuality finding 
its only outlet in cruelly eroticized violence, where love is hate, death is life, 
and war is sex. Here is the "brick and mortar," spit and polish maniac giving 
orders to his troops: 



I want the army to send your families wristwatches and medals caked with 
blood and even with jissom . . . Preston! ... my revolver. . . . Warfare, 
screwing ... I want pictures of naked babies and holy virgins sewn into your 
linings ... on your hair brilliantine, ribbons in the hair on your ass . . . 
And your eyes like the bayonet. And screwing. Get me: war's a Tip-roaring orgy. 
Triumphal awakening! My boots more brilliant Preston! I want war and 
screwing in the sun! And guts oozing in the sun! Get it? 
The Sergeant: Got it. 9T 

65 This is not to say that Fanon and Genet are always in agreement. The patronizing 
and male-chauvinist attitude which characterizes Fanon's chapter on Muslim women in 
Notes on a Dying Colonialism, a portent of how Algerian nationalism exploited and co- 
opted this oppressed group, could not be more far removed from Genet's own radicalism 
in supporting their liberation. 

»° Genet, The Screens, p. 118. 

<"lbid., pp. 78-80. 



360 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



The brothel is a sort of barometer of revolutionary and counterrevolution- 
ary progress. During the stupor of colonial despair, it was the refuge of 
dreams and hope, where Si Slimane, the first martyr-agitator, was honored. 
When the insurrection actually occurs, the whores lose their leper status, are 
united with the village women and become one with the national cause. 
For a while they dispense free service. Later they even consider closing shop. 
But as the revolt is co-opted by efficient native patriarchal authority ("W e 
want to be the stronger" 98 the new soldiers preach to the village) the pros- 
titutes fall back to their traditional outcast standing. One is murdered by 
the village wives and the rest settle back into the normalcy of divided female 
camps, inflationary prices, and an ill-disguised hostility for the men who use 
them. 

Kadidja and Ommu were the personifications of the popular rage. The 
new Arab army, like the French Legion, are but the old oppressive virility 
cult subsidized by the state, another set of bullies, in power through a new 
establishment. And as officials, they are infinitely more noxious than individu- 
alist criminals or the Big Shots of Mettray. Of the triad of matriarchs 
who proclaim the spirit of the revolution, Kadidja and Said's Mother (who 
grew so unconventional she lifted her hand to a man and strangled a 
French soldier) have been ghosts long enough to be beyond politics. Only 
Ommu is left. And her only course lies in "bottling" Said, the symptom of 
that crushing ignominy which, through the example of its ulcerous spiritual 
condition, first excited the tumult. Said is the product of the colonial system, 
a way of life, which, since it produced the revolution, must never be for- 
gotten. If the shame of the past were to be obliterated, the Algerians would 
also be left without purpose. So Said must be preserved in art, or as Ommu 
puts it, he must "become song." 

Turning upon a soldier of the new militia, Ommu taunts them as a new 
set of bosses: "You lousy little stinker, you snot nose ... go join the other 
side where there's stately beauty . . . maybe you've already done it, you're 
joining them and copying them excites you. To be their reflection is already 
to be one of them." 90 For the "expected" has come about, and Ommu sees 
her own sons have "reached the stage of uniforms, discipline, jaunty marches 
and bare arms . . . parade and heroic death." 100 Not to mention "martial 
beauty" which as she points out, equates lovemaking with murder quite as 
the Legion had done. 1 " 1 

While the soldiers of the new dictatorship prattle of "the efficacy of com- 

W Ibid., p. 137. 
m lbid., p. 135. 

100 Ibid. 

101 The historical accuracy of Genet's version of the Algerian Revolution has been 
attested to. Thody sums it up very well: "The dissension between the women, represent- 
ing the criminally undisciplined upsurge of revolt, and the triumphant revolutionary 
army, with its cult of discipline and clean living, also reflects what happened in Algeria 
itself, and entitles the play to be considered as historical drama. Thody, op. cit., p. 209. 



JEAN GENET 



361 



bat," Ommu's ancient wisdom counters— "the aesthetics of decease." 102 Al- 
ready anxious there will be none honest enough to succeed her in agitation, 
she lectures a priggish young bit of militarism: "Soldier of ours, young prick- 
head, there are truths that must never be applied, that must be made to 
thrive through the song they've become. Go die facing the enemy. Your 
death is no truer than my raving. You and your pals are proof that we need 
a Said." 103 What Ommu seeks in Said is proof that there is a humanity 
grander than drilled heroism. 

Said, independent maverick to the end, refuses to belong to either camp: 
"To the old gal, to the soldiers, to all of you, I say shit." 104 Like Leila, he 
never arrives at Genet's heaven of paper screens at the top of the stage, but 
passes into the national atmosphere, the completely unreconstructed man. 
Impervious even to firing squads when the military government cuts him 
down, he persists as a compost of humiliation and the sordid past— "save the 
little heap of garbage since that's what inspires us," Ommu had advised. 105 

While Said and Leila become legend and memory, Ommu or some other 
prophetess will go on agitating, preserving the meaning of recalcitrance. 
Curmudgeon folk figure, one counts on her not to "kick off" as she'd like 
to, but to carry on "burying this one, screaming at that one: I'll live to be 
a hundred." 100 Emblem of woman, she has lived to see mulish arrogance once 
again stifle her freedom and suborn her humanity. Having been a "dish rag" 
for a thousand years, she has time, patience and experience. Since she is 
deathless resistance and a new spirit in the world, there is hope yet. And the 
revolution which liberates Said and Ommu will not only be the last, but 
the first. 

102 Genet, The Screens, p. 195. 
IMlbid. 

Mi Ibid., p. 197. 

105 Ibid., p. 185. The correspondence to Genet's own way of thinking about himself 
is noteworthy. 
w6 lbid., p. 200. 



"*i r 



POSTSCRIPT 



Genet's homosexual analysis of sexual politics was chosen, not only for the 
insights it affords into the arbitrary status content of sexual role, but because 
it was against the taboo of homosexuality that Mailer's counterrevolutionary 
ardor has hurled its last force. Yet there is evidence in the last few years that 
the reactionary sexual ethic we have traced, beginning with Lawrence's 
cunning sabotage of the feminist argument and Miller's flamboyant con- 
tempt for it, has nearly spent itself. 

Other progressive forces have recently asserted themselves, notably the re- 
volt of youth against the masculine tradition of war and virility. Of course 
the most pertinent recent development is the emergence of a new feminist 
movement, Here again, it is difficult to explain just why such a development 
occurred when it did. 107 The enormous social change involved in a sexual 
revolution is basically a matter of altered consciousness, the exposure and 
elimination of social and psychological realities underlying political and 
cultural structures. We are speaking, then, of a cultural revolution, which, 
while, it must necessarily involve the political and economic reorganization 
traditionally implied by the term revolution, must go far beyond this as well. 
And here it would seem that the most profound changes implied are ones 

107 Civil Rights was undoubtedly a force, for second-generation feminists were, like 
their predecessors, inspired by the example of black protest. The disenchantment of 
women in the New Left with the sexist character of that movement provided considerable 
impetus as well. 



POSTSCRIPT 



363 



accomplished by human growth and true re-education, rather than those ar- 
rived at through the theatrics of armed struggle— even should the latter be- 
come inevitable. There is much reason to believe that the possession of num- 
bers, dedication, and creative intelligence could even render unnecessary the 
usual self-destructive resort to violent tactics. Yet no lengthy evolutionary 
process need be implied here, rather the deliberate speed fostered by modern 
communication, in an age when groups such as students, for example, can 
become organized in a great number of countries in a matter of some two 
years. 

When one surveys the spontaneous mass movements taking place all over 
the world, one is led to hope that human understanding itself has grown 
ripe for change. In America one may expect the new women's movement to 
ally itself on an equal basis with blacks and students in a growing radical 
coalition. It is also possible that women now represent a very crucial element 
capable of swinging the national mood, poised at this moment between the 
alternatives of progress or political repression, toward meaningful change. 
As the largest alienated element in our society, and because of their numbers, 
passion, and length of oppression, its largest revolutionary base, women might 
come to play a leadership part in social revolution, quite unknown before 
in history. The changes in fundamental values such a coalition of expropri- 
ated groups— blacks, youth, women, the poor— would seek are especially 
pertinent to realizing not only sexual revolution but a gathering impetus 
toward freedom from rank or prescriptive role, sexual or otherwise. For to 
actually change the quality of life is to transform personality, and this can- 
not be done without freeing humanity from the tyranny of sexual-social 
category and conformity to sexual stereotype— as well as abolishing racial 
caste and economic class. 

It may be that a second wave of the sexual revolution might at last ac- 
complish its aim of freeing half the race from its immemorial subordination 
—and in the process bring us all a great deal closer to humanity. It may be 
that we shall even be able to retire sex from the harsh realities of politics, but 
not until we have created a world we can bear out of the desert we inhabit. 



IF 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Works Consulted in Anthropology 

Bachofen, J. J.: Myth Religion and Mother Right, a translation of Mutterrecht 

und Urreligion, a selection of the writings of J. J. Bachofen, edited by Rudolf 

Marx, 192.6; translated front the German by Ralph Mannheim (Princeton, Bol- 

Iingen Series, 1967). 
Bettelheim, Bruno: Symbolic Wounds: Puberty Rites and the Envious Male 

(New York, Collier, 1962). 
Briffault, Robert: The Mothers: A Study of the. Origins of Sentiments and 

Institutions, translated from the French, three volumes (New York, Macmillan, 

1927). 
Briffault, Robert: The Mothers (1927), abridged by Gordon Battray Taylor 

(London, George Allen & Unwin, 1959). 
Crawley, Ernest: The Mystic Rose, A Study of Primitive Marriage and of 

Primitive Thought on Its Bearing on Marriage, revised edition, two volumes, 

prepared by Theodore Besterman (London , Methuen , 1927). 
Dorkheim, Emile: The Elementary Forms of Religious Life (19 15), translated 

from the French by Joseph Ward Swain (New York, Free Press, 1965). 
Ford, Clellan S., and Beach, Frank A.: Patterns of Sexual Behavior (New 

York, Harper, 1951)- 
Fried, Morton H.: The Evolution of Political Society, An Essay in Political 

Anthropology (New York, Random House, 1967). 
Harris, Marvin: The Origins of Anthropological Theory (New York, Columbia 

University, 1969). 
Harrison, Jane: Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (1903). Cambridge, 

England, Cambridge University Press, 1922, 2nd Edition. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



36S 



Hays, H. R.: The Dangerous Sex, The Myth of Feminine Evil (New York, Put- 
nam, 1964). 

Levi-Strauss, Claude: Structural Anthropology, translated from the French 
by Claire Jacobson and Brooke Grundfest Schoepf (New York, Basic Books, 
1963). 

Levi-Strauss, Claude: The Savage Mind, translated from the French (Chicago, 
University of Chicago, 1966). 

Levi-Strauss, Claude: Totemism, translated from the French by Rodney 
Needham (Boston, Beacon, 1963). 

Maine, Sir Henry: Ancient Law (London, Murray, i860. 

Maine, Sir Henry: The Early History of Institutions (London, 1875). 

MALiNowsKr, Bronislaw: Sex and Repression in Savage Society (New York, 
Humanities Press, 1927). 

Malinowski, Bronislaw : Sex, Culture and Myth (New York, Harcourt, Brace, 
1962). 

McLennon, John: The PatriarchalTheory (London, Macmillan, 1885). 

Mead, Margaret: Sex and Temperament (New York, Morrow, 1935). 

Mead, Margaret: Male and Female (New York, Morrow, 1949). 

Morgan, Lewis Henry: Ancient Society (1877) (New York, World, 1963). 

Murdock, George Peter: Social Structure (New York, Macmillan, 1949). 

Schurtz, Heinrich; Alterklassen und Mannerbiinde (Berlin, Georg Reimer, 
1902). 

Tiger, Lionel: Men in Groups (New York, Random House, 1 969). 

Vaertung, Mathias and Matilda ; The Dominant Sex, A Study in the Sociol- 
ogy of Sex Differentiation (London, George Allen & Unwin, 1932). 

Westermarck, Edward: A Short History of Marriage (New York, Macmillan, 
1926). 

Westermarck, Edward: The History of Human Marriage, fifth edition, three 
volumes (London, Macmillan, 1922). 

Westermarck, Edward: The Future of Marriage in Western Civilization (Lon- 
don, Macmillan, 1936). 

Works Consulted in Biological Sciences 

Brecher, Ruth and Edward: An Analysis of Human Sexual Response (New 
York, New American Library, 1966). 

Glass, David C. (Editor), Biology and Behavior (New York, Rockefeller Uni- 
versity and the Russell Sage Foundation, 1967). 

Kinsey, Alfred C: Sexual Behavior in the Human Male: In the Human Fe- 
male (Philadelphia, Saunders, 1949, 1953). 

Masters, W. H., and Johnson, V. E.: Human Sexual Response (Boston, Little, 
Brown, 1966). 

Money, John, editor, Sex Research, New Developments (New York, Holt, 1965). 

Shbrfey, Mary Jane: "The Evolution and Nature of Female Sexuality in Rela- 
tion to Psychoanalytic Theory," Journal of the American Psychoanalytic As- 
sociation, Volume 14, January 1966, No. 1 (New York, International Uni- 
versities Press, 1966). 

Stoller, Robert J. : Sex and Gender (New York, Science House, 1968). 



¦^ f 



366 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Works Consulted on the History and Status of Women 

General Bibliographies 

McGregor, O.: "The Social Position of Women in England 1850-1914; A Bibli- 
ography," British Journal of Sociology, March 1955. 

Banks, J. A. and Olive: "List of Relevant Books and Pamphlets to the Woman 
Question Published in Britain in the Period 1792- 1880." An Appendix to 
Feminism and Family Planning (New York, Schocken, 1964). 

Cisler, Lucinda: Women: a Bibliography. New York: Lucinda Cisler, 1968, 
1969, 1970. 6th edition (1970). $2.50 plus s.a.s.e. from Lucinda Cisler, 16; 
W. 91 St., N.Y., NY10024. 

There are helpful bibliographies in Sinclair, Klein, and Neff. 

Books 

Adams, Mildred: The Right to Be People (New York, Lippincott, 1967). 
Banks, J. A. and Olive: Feminism and Family Planning in Victorian England 

(New York, Schocken, 1964). 
Bardeche, Maurice: Histoire des Femvies, in two volumes (Paris, Stock, 1968). 
Bebel, August: Woman and Socialism (1885), translated from the German 

(New York, Socialist Literature Company, 191 o). 
Bird, Caroline: Born Female (New York, McKay, 1968). 
Chernyshevsky, N. G. : What Is to Be Done? (Russia, 1 863). 
Dangerfield, George: The Strange Death of Liberal England, 19 10— 1914 

(New York, Capricorn, 1935, 1961). 
Db Beauvoir, Simone: The Second Sex (1949), translated from the French by 

H. M.Parshley (New York, Knopf, 1953). 
De Rham, Edith: The Love Fraud (New York, Clarkson Potter, 1965). 
Ditzion, Sidney: Marriage, Morals and Sex in America— A History of Ideas 

(New York, Bookman Associates, 1953). 
Ellmann, Mary: Thinking About Women (New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1968). 
Engels, Friedrich: The Origins of the Family, Private Property and riie State 

(1884), translated from the German by Ernest Untermann (Chicago, Charles 

Kerr, 1902). 
Farber, Seymour, and Wilson, Roger H. L., editors: The Potential of Woman 

(New York, McGraw-Hill, 1963). 
Fawcett, Millicent Garrett: Woman's Suffrage (London, The People's 

Books, 1912). 
Flbxner, Eleanor: Century of Struggle: The Woman's Rights Movement in the 

United States (Cambridge, Massachusetts, Belknap Press, Harvard University, 

1966). 
Friedan, Betty: The Feminine Mystique (New York, Norton, 1963). 
Fulford, Roger: Votes for Women (London, Faber and Faber, 1957). 
Furness, C. F.: The Genteel Female, An Anthology (New York, Knopf, 1931). 
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins: The Man-Made World: Our Androcentric Cul- 
ture (New York, Charlton, 19 14). 
Gilman, Charlotte: Women and Economics (New York, Charlton, 1898). 
Graham, Abbie : Ladies in Revolt (New York, The Woman's Press, 1934). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



367 



Grimes, Alan P.: The Puritan Ethic and Woman Suffrage (New York, Oxford, 
1967). 

Herschberger, Ruth: Adam's Rib (New York, Pellegrini and Cudahy, 1948). 

History of Women's Suffrage in six volumes, edited by Susan B. Anthony, Eliza- 
beth Cady Stanton, Matilda Joclyn Gage, and Ida Husted Harper, Rochester, 
New York, 1881, 1886, 1902, 1922. 

Kanowitz, Leo: Women and the Law, The Unfinished Revolution (Albuquerque, 
University of New Mexico, 1969). 

Klein, Viola: The Feminine Character, History of an Ideology (London, Kegan 
Paul, 1946). 

Kraditor, Aileen: The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement (New York, 
Columbia University, 1965). 

Kraditor, Aileen: Up from the Pedestal, Landmark Writings in the American 
Woman's Struggle for Equality (Chicago, Quadrangle, 1968). 

Lifton, Robert Jay, editor: The Woman in America (Boston, Beacon, 1964). 

Mill, John Stuart: The Subjection of Women (1869) (London, Oxford, 
1966). 

Neff, Wanda Fraiken: Victorian Working Women (New York, Columbia Uni- 
versity, 1929). 

Newcomer, Mabel: A Century of Higher Education for American Women (New 
York, 1959). 

O'Neill, William L.: Everyone Was Brave. The Rise and Fall of Feminism 
in America (Chicago, Quadrangle, 1969). 

O'Neill, William L.: "Feminism as a Radical Ideology," in Dissent: Explora- 
tions in The History of American Radicalism, edited by Alfred E. Young, 
Northern Illinois University Press, 1968. 

Pankhurst, Emmeline: My Own Story (London, Everleigh Nash, 19 14). 

Pankhurst, Sylvia: The Suffragette Movement (New York, Longmans Green, 

193O. 
Patai, Raphael, editor: Women in the Modern World (New York, Free 

Press, 1967). 
Rogers, Kathertne M.: The Troublesome Helpmate, A History of Misogyny in 

Literature (Seattle, University of Washington, 1966). 
Rubin, Theodore Isaac: In The Life (New York, Macmillan, 1961). 
Ruskin, John: Sesame and Lilies, "Of Queen's Gardens" (1865) (Chicago, 

Homewood, 1902). 
Sinclair, Andrew: The Emancipation of the American Woman (New York, 

Harper, 1965). 
Strachey, Ray, editor: Owr Freedom and Its Results (London, Hogarth, 1936). 
Strachey, Ray: The Cause: A Short History of the Wcnnan's Movement In Great 

Britain (London, G. Bell, 1928). 
Thomas, W. I.: TJie Unadjusted Girl (192,3) (New York, Harper, 1967). 
Thompson, William: Appeal of One Half of the Human Race, Women, Against 

the Pretensions of the Other Half, Men, to Retain them in Political and Thence 

in Civil and Domestic Slavery; in Reply to a Paragraph of Mr. Qames~) Mill's 

Celebrated "Article on Government" (London, 1825). 
Walsh, Correa Moylan: Feminism (New York, Sturgis and Watton, 1917)- 
White, Lynn; Educating Our Daughters (New York, Harper, 1950). 



368 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Wollstonecraft, Mary: A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1791) (Lon- 
don, Dent, Everyman Edition). 
Woolf, Virginia: A Room of One's Own (New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1929). 
Woolf, Virginia: Three Guineas (New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1938). 

Periodicals and Pamphlets 

Handbook on Women Workers, United States Department of Labor, Women's 
Division and other of the many pamphlets published by the Women's Bureau 
on the condition of female labor in the United States. 

Report of the President's Commission on the Status of Women— American Women, 
and other reports of the President's Commission, dealing with education, em- 
ployment and so forth. LT. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 

Sweden Today: The Status of Women in Sweden Report to the United Nations 
(Stockholm, The Swedish Institute, 1968). 

"The Sexual Renaissance in America," special issue of the Journal of Social 
Issues XXII: 2 (April 1966). 

"Sex and the Contemporary American Scene," special issue of the Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science, Volume 376, March 1968. 

Works Consulted on the History and Status of 
Women with Special Reference to: 

Nazi Germany 

Abrahamson, David: Men, Mind and Power (New York, Columbia University, 
1945). 

Brady, Robert A.: The Spirit and Structure of German Fascism (New York, 
Viking, 1937). 

Hitler, Adolf: Mein Kampf, translated from the German and edited by Cham- 
berlain, et al. (New York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1940). 

Hitler, Adolf: My New Order, A Selection of the Speeches of Hitler, edited 
by Raoul de Roussy de Sales (New York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1941). 

Kirkpatrick, Clifford: Nazi Germany, Its Women and Family Life (Indian- 
apolis, Bobbs-Merrill, 1938). 

Laquer, Walter: Youwg Germany (London, Routledge, Kegan Paul, 196a). 

Lowrie, Robert H.: Toward Understanding Germany (Chicago, University of 
Chicago, 1954). 

Reich, Wilhelm: The Mass Psychology of Fascism, translated by Theodore P. 
Wolfe (New York, Orgone Institute, 1946). 

Reich, Wilhelm: The Sexual Revolution (New York, Farrar, Straus, 1945). 

Seydewttz, Max: Civil Life in Wartime Germany (New York, Viking, 1945). 

Thomas, Catherine: Women in Nazi Germany (London, Gollancz, 1943). 

The Soviet Union 

Brown, Donald R., editor: Women in the Soviet Union (New York, Teachers 
College, 1968). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



369 



Fischer, Louis: Soviet Journey (New York, Harrison Smith and Robert Haas, 

1935)- 

Geiger, H. Kent: The Family in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Massachusetts, Har- 
vard, 1968). 

Halle, Fanina: Women in Soviet Russia (London, Routledge, 1933). 

Kingsbury, Susan M., and Fatrchild, Mildred: Factory, Family and Women 
in the Soviet Union (New York, Putnam, 1935). 

Mace, David and Vera: The Soviet Family (New York, Doubleday, 1963). 

Maxarenko, A. S.: The Collective Family (1937), translated from the Russian 
by Robert Daglish (New York, Doubleday, 1967). 

Schlesingbr, Rudolf: The Family in the U.S.S.R. (Documents and Readings) 
(London, Roudedge, 1949). 

Trotsky, Leon: The Revolution Betrayed, translation by Max Eastman (New 
York, Doubleday, 1937). 



Works Consulted in Psychology 

Abraham, Karl: "Manifestations of the Female Castration Complex," Interna- 
tional Journal of Psychoanalysis, Vol. 3, March 1922. 

Bonaparte, Marie: Female Sexuality (1953) (New York, Grove, 1965). 

Brown, Norman O.: Life Against Death (New York, Random House, 1959). 

Deutsch, Helene: The Psychology of Women, A Psychoanalytic Interpretation 
(New York, Grune and Stratton, 1945) Two Volumes. 

Erikson, Erik: Childhood and Society (New York, Norton, 1950). 

Erikson, Erik: "Identity and the Life Cycle, Selected Papers," published by 
Psychological Issues, Vol. I, No. 1, 1959 (New York, International Universities, 

1959^. 
Erikson, Erik; Insight and Responsibility (New York, Norton, 1964). 
Erikson, Erik: Identity, Youth and Crisis (New York, Norton, 1968). 
Freud, Sigmund: 

The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud 
in thirty volumes, edited by James Strachey (London, Hogarth Press and 
the Institute of Psychoanalysis, 1953). 

Collected Papers, edited by Joan Riviere, in five volumes (New York, Basic 
Books, 1959). 

Dora, An Analysis of a Case of Hysteria (1905, 1908, 1909) (New York, Col- 
lier, 1963). 

Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, translated from the German by A. A. 
Brill (New York, Dutton, 1962). 

Totem and Taboo, translated from the German by James Strachey (New York, 
Norton, 1950). 

CiviZizatJow and Its Discontents (1930), translated from the German by James 
Strachey (New York, Norton, 1961). 

New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (1933) translated from the Ger- 
man by James Strachey (New York, Norton, 1964). 

Letters of Sigmund Freud, edited by Ernst L, Freud (New York, Basic Books, 
i960). 



i r 



370 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Letters, The Origins of Psychoanalysis, edited by Marie Bonaparte, Anna Freud, 
and Ernst Kris, translated from the German by Eric Mosbacher and James 
Strachey (New York, Basic Books, 1954). 

Works Concerning Sigmund Freud: 

Jones, Ernest: The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud in two volumes (New 

York, Basic Books, 1953). 
Fromm, Erich: Sigmund Freud's Mission (New York, Grove, 1959). 
La Piers, Richard: The Freudian Ethic (New York, 1959). 
Rieff, Philip: Freud: The Mind of the Moralist (New York, Doubleday, 
1961). 

Kagin, Jerome: "The Acquisition and Significance of Sex-Typing," in Review 
of Child Development Research, edited by M. Hoffman (New York, Russell 
Sage, 1964). 

Krich, Aron, editor: The Sexual Revolution, Pioneer Writing on Sex in two 
volumes (New York, Dell, 1963, 1965). 

Lundberg, Ferdinand, and Farnham, Marynia: Modern Woman: The Lost 
Sex (New York, Grosset and Dunlap, 1947). 

Money, John: The Psychologic Study of Man (Springfield, Illinois, Charles C. 
Thomas, 1957). 

Neumann, Erich: The Origins and History of Consciousness (New York, Harper, 
1962). 

Reich, Wilhelm: The Sexual Revolution, Toward a Self-Governing Character 
Structure, translated from the German by Theodore P. Wolfe (New York, 
Farrar, Straus, 1945). 

Reik, Theodor: Ritual: Psychoanalytic Studies; The Psychological Problems of 
Religion, No. I (New York, Farrar, Straus, 1946). 

Reik, Theodor: Of Love and Lust (New York, Farrar, Straus, 1957). 

Reik, Theodor: Myth and Guilt (New York, George Braziller, 1957). 

Reik, Theodor: The Creation of Woman (New York, George Braziller, i960). 

Reik, Theodor: The Temptation (New York, George Braziller, 1961). 

Robinson, Marib: The Power of Sexual Surrender (New York, Doubleday, 
1959). 

R6heim, Geea: "Eden," Psychoanalytic Review, Vol. XXVII, New York, 1940. 

R6heim, Geza: "Psychoanalysis of Primitive Cultural Types," International Jour- 
nal of Psychoanalysis, Vol. XVIII, London, 1932. 

Sampson, Ronald V.: The Psychology of Power (New York, Random House, 
1968). 

Sherfey, Mary Jane: "The Evolution and Nature of Female Sexuality in Rela- 
tion to Psychoanalytic Theory," Journal of the American Psychoanalytic As- 
sociation, Vol. 14, January 1966, No. 1 (New York, International Universities 
Press, 1966). 

Works Consulted in Sociology 

Adorno, T. W.; Frendel-Brunswik, Else; Levinson, Daniel; and Sanford, R. 

Nevitt: The Authoritarian Personality (New York, Norton, 1969). 
Bendix, Teinhard, and Lifset, Seymour Martin: CZass, Status and Power: 

Social Stratification in Comparative Perspective (New York, Free Press, 1966). 
Berger, Peter L., and Luckmann, Thomas: The Social Construction of Re- 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



37* 



ality: A Treatise on the Sociology of Knowledge (New York, Doubleday, 1966). 
Bernard, Jesse: The Sex Game (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, 

1968). 
Calverton, V. F., and Schmalhausen, S. D.: Sex in Civilization (New York, 

MacCauley, 1929). 
Deutsch, Karl W.: The Nerves of Government (Glencoe, Illinois, Free Press, 

1963). 
Hacker, Helen Mayer: "Women as a Minority Group," Social Forces, Vol. 

XXX, October 1951. 
Herkheimer, Max, editor: Studien uber Autoritat und Familie, Forschungs- 

berichte aus dem Institut fur Sozialforschung (Paris, Librairie Felix Alcan, 

1936). 
Hernton, Calvin C: Sex and Racism in America (New York, Grove, 1965). 
Hughes, Everett C: "Social Change and Status Protest," Pylon (Vol. X, 1st 

Quarter, 1949). 
Komarovsky, Mirra: "Functional Analysis of Sex Roles," American Sociological 

Review (Vol. XV, No. 4, August 1950). 
Mead, George H.: Mind, Self and Society (Chicago, University of Chicago, 

1934)- 
Merton, Robert K.: Social Theory and Social Structure (Glencoe, Illinois, Free 

Press, 1957). 
Mills, C. Wright: Power Politics and People: Collected Essays of C. Wright 

Mills (London, Oxford, 1963). 
Myrdal, Gunnar: An American Dilemma (New York, Harper, 1944, 1962). 
Parsons, Talcott: Essays in Sociological Theory, revised edition (New York, 

Free Press, 1954). 
Rainwater, Lee: And the Poor Get Children: Sex, Contraception and Family 

Planning in the Working Class (Chicago, Quadrangle, i960), 
SlMMEL, Georg: The Sociology of Georg Simmel, translated from the German 

by Kurt Wolff (New York, Free Press, 1950). 
Smelser, Neil J.: Social Change in the Industrial Revolution (Chicago, Uni- 
versity of Chicago, 1959). 
Taylor, Gordon Rattray: Sex in History (London, Thames and Hudson, 1953). 
Thomas, William I.: Sex and Society (Boston, Richard G. Badger, 1907). 
Veblen, Thorstein; TJie Theory of the Leisure Class (1899). 
Watson, Godwin: Social Psychology: Issues and Insights (New York, Lippincott, 

1966). 
Weber, Max: From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, translated from the Ger- 
man and edited by H. H. Garth and C. Wright Mills (New York, Oxford, 

1964). 
Weber, Max: TJie Theory of Social and Economic Organization, translated from 

the German and edited by H. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons (New York, 

Free Press, 1964). 
Weber, Max: On Law in Economy and Society, translated from the German and 

edited by Edward Shills and Max Rheinstein (New York, Simon and Schuster, 

1967). 
Wirth, Louis, editor and Linton, Ralph: The Science of Man in the World 

Crisis (New York, Appleton, 1945). 



372 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Core List of Works Consulted on the Sociology of the 

Family: 

Aries, Philippe: Centuries of Childhood, A Social History of Family Life, trans- 
lated from the French by Robert Balick (New York, Random House, 1962), 

Bell, Norman W., and Vocel, Ezra F.; A Modern Introduction to the Family, 
revised edition (New York, Free Press, 1968). 

Folsom, Joseph K.: The Family and Democratic Society (New York, John Wiley, 

1934, 1943)- 
Goods, William J. : The Family (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, 

1964). 
Parsons, Talcott, and Bales, Robert: Family, Socialization and Interaction 

Process (New York, Free Press, 1955). 
Schur, Edwin M., editor: The Family and the Sexual "Revolution (Bloomington, 

University of Indiana, 1964). 
Winch, Robert F., McGmnis, Robert, and Barringer, Herbert R., editors: 

Selected Studies in Marriage and the Family {New York, Holt, 1962). 

D. H. Lawrence 

NOVELS: 

The White Peacock (191 1) (Carbondale, Southern Illinois University, 1966). 

The Trespasser (191a) (London, Heineman, 1950). 

Sons and Lovers (19 13) (New York, Viking, 1966). 

Sons and Lovers (1913) A Critical Edition, edited by Julian Moynahan (New 

York, Viking, 1968). 
The Rainbow (1915) (New York, Viking, 1967). 
Women in Love (1920) (New York, Viking, i960). 
The Lost Girl (1920) (New York, Viking, 1968). 
Aaron's Rod (1922) (New York, Viking, 1961), 
Kangaroo (1923) (New York, Viking, i960). 
The Plumed Serpent (1926) (New York, Random House, 1951). 
Lady Chatterley's Lover (1928) (New York, Grove, 1957). 

poetry, short stories and selections: 

Selected Poems (1916) (New York, Viking, 1959). 

Pansies (Poems) (1929) (London, Martin Seeker, 1929). 

St Mam (192;) and The Man Who Died (1929) (New York, Random House, 

1953)- 

Four Short Novels of D. H. Lawrence (1923) (New York, Viking, 1965). 

The Complete Short Stories of D. H. Lawrence, in three volumes (New York, 
Viking, 1 961). 

The Woman Who Rode Away and Other Stories (New York, Berkeley Medal- 
lion Reprint, 1962). 

The Late D. H. Lawrence, 1925—30, edited by William York Tindall (New 
York, Knopf, 1952). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



373 



The Portable D. H. Lawrence, edited by Diana Trilling (New York, Viking, 
1946). 

Phoenix, The Posthumous Papers of D. H. Lawrence, edited by Edward Mc- 
Donald (London, William Heinemann, 1936). 

Sex, Literature and Censorship, edited by Harry T. Moore (New York, Viking, 

1959)- 
Selected Literary Criticism, edited by Anthony Beal (New York, Viking, 
1966). 

ESSAYS: 

Twilight in Italy (19 16). 

Sea and Sardinia (1921) (reprinted together; New York, Doubleday, 1954). 

Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious (1921). 

Fantasia of the Unconscious (1922) (reprinted together; New York, Viking, 
i960). 

Studies in Classic American Literature (1923) (New York, Doubleday, 1953). 

Re/IectioMs on the Death of a Porcupine (1925) (Bloomington, Indiana Uni- 
versity, 1963). 

Apocalypse (1931) (New York, Viking, 1966). 

Etruscan Places (1932) (New York, Viking, 1957). 

BIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL: 

Letters of D. H. Lawrence, edited by Aldous Huxley (New York, Viking, 
1932). 

Lawrence, Frieda, The Memoirs and Correspondence, edited by E. W. Ted- 
lock, Jr. (New York, Knopf, 1964). 

Chambers, Jesse: D. H. Lawrence: A Personal Record by "E.T." Revised Edi- 
tion (New York, Barnes and Noble, 1965). 

Moore, Harry T.: The Intelligent Heart, The Story of D. H. Lawrence (New 
York, Farrar, Straus, 1954). 

WORKS OP LITERARY CRITICISM CONCERNING D. H. LAWUBNCB: 

Bentley, Eric: A Century of Hero Worship (Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1944)- 

Clark, L. D.: Dark Night of the Body (Austin, University of Texas, 1964). 

Freeman, Mary: D. H. Lawrence, A Basic Study of His Ideas (New York, 
Grosset and Dunlap, 1955). 

Gregory, Horace: D. H. Lawrence, Pilgrim of the Apocalypse, A Critical Study 
(New York, Viking, 1933). 

Hoffman, Frederick J.: Freudianism and the Literary Mind (Louisiana State 
University, 1945). 

Hough, Graham: Dark Sun, A Study of D. H. Lawrence (New York, Putnam, 
1956). 

Leavis, F. R.: D. H. Lawrence, Novelist (Knopf, 1956). 

Spilka, Mark: The Love Ethic of D. H. Lawrence (Bloomington, Indiana Uni- 
versity, 1955). 

Spilka, Mark, Editor: D. H. Lawrence, A Collection of Critical Essays (Engle- 
wood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, 1963). 



374 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Henry Miller 

autobiographical novels: 

Tropic of Cancer (1934) (New York, Grove, 1961). 

Black Spring (1936, 1938, 1939) (New York, Grove, 1963). 

Tropic of Capricorn (1939) (New York, Grove, 1961). 

The Rosy Crucifixion, Book One, Sexus (1949) (New York, Grove, 1965). 

The Rosy Crucifixion, Book Two, Plexus (1953) (New York, Grove, 1965). 

The Rosy Crucifixion, Book Three, Nexus (1960) (New York, Grove, 1965). 

ESSAYS: 

The Cosmological Eye (1939) (New York, New Directions, 1939). 

The World of Sex (1940, 1959) (revised edition; New York, Grove, 1965). 

The Wisdom of the. Heart (1941) (New York, New Directions, 1941)- 

The Colossus of Maroussi (1941) (Harmondsworth, England, Penguin, 1950). 

Sunday After the War (1944) (New York, New Directions, 1944). 

The Air-conditioned Nightmare (1945) (New York, New Directions, 1945). 

Remember to Remember (1947) (New York, New Directions, 1947). 

The Books in My Life (1952) (New York, New Directions, 1952). 

The Smile at the Foot of the Ladder (1955) (San Francisco, California, Green- 
wood Press, 1955). 

The Time of the Assassins, A Study of Rimbaud (New York, New Direc- 
tions, 1956). 

A Devil in Paradise (1956) (New York, New American Library, 1956). 

Big Sur and the Oranges of Hieronymus Bosch (1957) (New York, New Di- 
rections, 1957). 

Stand Still Like a Hummingbird (1962) (New York, New Directions, 1962). 

COLLECTIONS: 

Henry Miller on Writing, edited by Thomas H. Moore (New York, New Di- 
rections, 1964). 

The Intimate Henry Miller, edited by Lawrence Clark Powell (New York, New 
American Library, 1959). 

letters: 

Letters to Anats Nin, edited by Gunther Stuhlmann (New York, Putnam, 

1965). 
Lawrence Durreil and Henry Miller, A Private Correspondence, edited by 

George Wickes (New York, Dutton, 1964). 

WORKS OF LITERARY CRITICISM CONCERNING HENRY MILLER: 

Baxter, Annette Kar: Henry Miller, Expatriate (Pittsburgh, University of 

Pittsburgh, 1961). 
Hassan, Ihab: The Literature of Silence: Henry Miller and Samuel Beckett 

(New York, Knopf, 1967). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



375 



Orwell, George: Collected Essays, including "Inside the Whale" (London, Mar- 
tin Seeker, 1961). 

Porter, Bern: The Happy Rock, A Book About Henry Miller (Berkeley, Cali- 
fornia, Packard Press, 1945)- 

Wickes, George: Henry Miller (pamphlet, University of Minnesota Pamphlets 
on American Writers) (Minneapolis, University of Minnesota, 1966). 

Wickes, George: Henry Miller and The Critics (Catbondale, Southern Illi- 
nois, University Press, 1963). 

Widmer, Kingsley: Henry Miller (New York, Twayne, 1963). 

Wilson, Edmund: The Shores of Light (New York, 1952). 

Norman Mailer 

novels; 

The Naked and The Dead (New York, Rinehart, 1948). 

Barberry Shore (New York, Rinehart, 1951). 

The Deer Park (New York, Putnam, 1955). 

An American Dream (New York, Dial, 1965). 

Why Are We in Vietnam? (New York, Putnam, 1967), 

SHORT STORIES, VERSE, AND OTHER: 

Advertisements for Myself (New York, Putnam, 1959). 

The Short Fiction of Norman Mailer (New York, Dell, 1967). 

The Deer Park, A Play (New York, Dial, 1967). 

Deaths for the Ladies and Other Disasters (New York, Putnam, 1962). 

ESSAYS AND REPORTAGE: 

The Presidential Papers (New York, Putnam, 1963). 

Cannibals and Christians (New York, Dial, 1966). 

Miami and the Siege of Chicago (New York, World, 1968). 

The Armies of the Night (New York, New American Library, 1968). 



Jban Genet 
prose fiction: 

Our Lady of Tlie Flowers (Notre-Dame des Flews') (1943 limited edition, 1951, 

trade edition). Translated from the French by Bernard Freeh tman (New 

York, Grove, 1963). 
QuereUe of Brest (.Querelle de Brest) (1947), translated from the French by 

Roger Senhouse (New York, Grove, 1967). 
The Thief's Journal (Journal du Voleur) (1949), translated from the French 

by Bernard Frechtman (New York, Grove, 1949). 
Miracle of the Rose (Mirocle de la Rose) (195O, translated from the French 

by Bernard Frechtman (New York, Grove, 1966). 
Pompes Fun&bres, Le Peckeur du Suquet, Querelle de Brest. Tome III Oeuvres 

Completes (Paris, Gallimard, 1953). 



376 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



PLAYS : 



Les Bonnes (1948) et Comment ]ouer les Bonnes (revised edition, 1963) 

(Decines Isere, France, L'Arbalete, Marc Barbezat, 1963). 
The Maids and Death-watch, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman 

(New York, Grove, 1954; revised edition, 1962). 
Le Balcon (1956) (Decines Isere, L'Arbalete, Marc Barbezat, 1956). 
The Balcony, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman (New York 

Grove, 1958, revised edition, 1966). 
Les Nigres, Clownerie (1958) Pour Jouer les Negres (Decines, Isere, 

L'Arbalete, Marc Barbezat, 1963). 
The Blacks: A Chwn Show, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman 

(New York, Grove, i960). 
Les Paravents (Decines, Isere, L'Arbalete, Marc Barbezat, 1961). 
The Screens, translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman (New York, 

Grove, 1962). 

poetry: 

Chants Secrets (Limited Edition) (Lyons, Marc Barbezat, 1945), 
PoMnes (Decines, Isere, L'Arbalete, Marc Barbezat, 1962). 

ESSAYS: 

L 'Atelier a" 'Alberto Giacometti (including Les Bonnes, L'Enfant Criminel, La 
FunambuUi) (Deanes, Isere, L'Arbalete, Marc Barbezat, 1958). 

Lettres a Roger Blin (Paris, Gallimard, 1966). 

Letters to Roger Blin, Reflections on the Theatre, translated from the French 
by Richard Seaver (New York, Grove, 1969). 

"The Funambulists," translated from the French by Bernard Frechtman, 
EvergrecM Review, No. 32, April-May 1964). 

WORKS OF LITERARY CRITICISM CONCERNING OR RELEVANT TO JEAN GENET: 

Artaud, Antonin: The Theatre and Its Double, translated from the French by 

Mary Caroline Richards (New York, Grove, 1958). 
Coe, Richard N.: The Vision of Jean Genet (New York, Grove, 1968). 
De Mott, Benjamin: "But He's a Homosexual . . ." The New American 

Review, No. 7, 1967 (New York, New American Library, 1967). 
Dennison, George: "The Moral Effect of the Legend of Genet," The New 

American Review, No. 7, 1967 (New York, New American Library, 1967). 
Driver, Tom: Jean Genet (Pamphlet, Columbia Essays on Modem Writers 

Series) (New York, Columbia University, 1966). 
Esslin, Martin: The Theatre of the Absurd (New York, Doubleday, 1961). 
Guichamaud, Jacques: Modern French Theatre From Giraudoux to Beckett 

(New Haven, Yale University, 1961). 
McMahon, Joseph H.: The Imagination of Jean Genet (New Haven, Yale 

University, 1963). 
Sartre, Jean-Paul: Saiwt Genet, Actor and Martyr, translated from the French 

by Bernard Frechtman (New York, George Braziller, 1964). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



377 



Pronko, Leon Cabell: Avant-Garde, The Experimental Theatre in Prance 

(Berkeley, University of California, 1964). 
Thody, Phillip: Jean Genet, A Study of His Novels (London, Hamish 

Hamilton, 1968). 

Miscellaneous 

Bum, W. L.: The Age of Equipoise (New York, Norton, 1965). 

De Rougemont, Denis: Love in the Western World translated from the French 
by Montgomery Belgion, Revised and Augmented Edition (New York, 
Pantheon, 1956). 

Houghton, Walter: The Victorian Frame of Mind (New Haven, Yale Uni- 
versity, 1957). 

La Fourcade, George: Swinburne (London, Bell, 1923). 

La Fourcade, George: La Jeunesse de Swinburne (Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 
1928). 

Legman, G.: The Rationale of the Dirty Joke: An Analysis of Sexual Humor, 
First Series (New York, Grove, 1968). 

Marcus, Steven: The Other Victorians: A Study of Sexuality and Pornography 
in Mid-Nineteenth-Century England (New York, Basic Books, 1966). 

Packe, Michael St. John: The Life of John Stuart Mill (New York, Macmillan, 

1954)- 
Praz, Mario: The Romantic Agony (Oxford, 1933). 
Ratchford, Fanny: The Brontes' Web of Childhood (New York, Columbia 

University, 1941). 
Wilson, Edmund: "Swinburne of Caheaton and Eton," Introduction to the 

Novels of A. C. Swinburne (New York, Noonday; Farrar, Straus, 1963). 
Wilson, Edmund: "Dickens: The Two Scrooges," in The Wound and The Bow 

(New York, Oxford, 1965, Corrected Edition). 
Young, Wayland: Eros Denied (New York, Grove, 1964). 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



SIGMUND FREUD 

Excerpts From Civilization and Its Discontents by Sigmund Freud, 1930. 
Translated from the German and edited by James Strachey. Copyright © 
1 96 1 by James Strachey. Reprinted by permission of W. W. Norton & Co., 
Inc., publisher. Also found in a revised translation in the Standard Edition 
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 21, revised 
and edited by James Strachey; The Hogarth Press, Ltd., Sigmund Freud 
Copyrights, Ltd., and The Institute of Psycho-Analysis. 

Excerpts from "Femininity" from New Introductory Lectures on Psycho- 
Analysis by Sigmund Freud. Copyright © 1933 by Sigmund Freud. Copy- 
right renewed 1961 by W. J. H. Sprott, Copyright © 1964, 1965 by James 
Strachey. Translated from the German and edited by James Strachey. Re- 
printed by permission of W. W. Norton & Co., Inc. Also found in the 
standard Edition of the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 22, revised 
and edited by James Strachey. Reprinted by permission of The Hogarth 
Press, Ltd., Sigmund Freud Copyrights, Ltd., and The Institute of Psycho- 
Analysis. 

Excerpt from "The Economic Problems of Masochism" by Sigmund Freud, 
1924. Translated under the supervision of Joan Riviere for The Collected 
Papers of Sigmund Freud, Vol. II, edited by Ernest Jones, M.D., published 
by Basic Books, Inc. 1959. Reprinted by permission of Basic Books, Inc. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



379 



Also found in a revised translation in the Standard Edition of the Complete 
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 19, revised and edited by 
James Strachey; The Hogarth Press, Ltd., Sigmund Freud Copyrights, Ltd., 
and The Institute of Psycho-Analysis. 

Excerpts from "Some Character Types Met With in Psycho-Analysis Work" 
by Sigmund Freud, 191 5. Translated under the supervision of Joan Riviere 
for The Collected Papers of Sigmund Freud, Vol. IV, edited by Ernest 
Jones, M.D., published by Basic Books, Inc., 1959. Reprinted by permission 
of Basic Books, Inc. Also found in a revised translation in the Standard 
Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 14, 
revised and edited by James Strachey; The Hogarth Press, Ltd., Sigmund 
Freud Copyrights, Ltd., and The Institute of Psycho-Analysis. 

Excerpt from 'The Taboo of Virginity" by Sigmund Freud, 191 8. Translated 
under the supervision of Joan Riviere for The Collected Papers of Sigmund 
Freud, Vol. IV, edited by Ernest Jones, M.D., published in 1959 by Basic 
Books, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Basic Books, Inc. Also found in a 
revised translation in the Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological 
Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 11, revised and edited by James Strachey; 
The Hogarth Press, Ltd., Sigmund Freud Copyrights, Ltd., and The Insti- 
tute of Psycho-Analysis. 

Excerpt from "On Narcissism, An Introduction" by Sigmund Freud, 1914. 
Translated under the supervision of Joan Riviere for The Collected Papers 
of Sigmund Freud, Vol. IV, edited by Ernest Jones, M.D., published 1959 
by Basic Books, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Basic Books, Inc. Also found 
in a revised translation in the Standard Edition of the Complete Psycholo- 
gical Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 14, revised and edited by James 
Strachey; The Hogarth Press, Ltd., Sigmund Freud Copyrights, Ltd., and 
the Institute of Psycho-Analysis. 

Excerpts from "Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Dis- 
tinctions Between the Sexes" by Sigmund Freud. Edited by James Strachey 
for The Collected Papers of Sigmund Freud, Vol. V, edited by Ernest Jones, 
M.D., published 1959 by Basic Books, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Basic 
Books, Inc. Also found in a revised translation in the Standard Edition of 
the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 19, revised and 
edited by James Strachey; The Hogarth Press, Ltd., Sigmund Freud Copy- 
rights, Ltd., and the Institute of Psycho-Analysis. 

Excerpts from 'The Psychology of Women" by Sigmund Freud, 1933. 
Translated by W. J. H. Sprott and edited by James Strachey for The Col- 
lected Papers of Sigmund Freud, Vol. V, edited by Ernest Jones, M.D., pub- 
lished by Basic Books, Inc., 1959. Reprinted by permission of Basic Books, 
Inc. Also found in a revised translation in the Standard Edition of the Com- 



1 



380 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



plete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 21, revised and edited 
by James Strachey; The Hogarth Press, Ltd., Sigmund Freud Copyrights, 
Ltd., and the Institute of Psycho- Analysis. 

D. H. LAWRENCE 

Excerpts from The Letters of D. H. Lawrence edited by Aldous Huxley. 
Copyright © 1932 by the Estate of D. H. Lawrence, copyright renewed 
1969 by Angelo Ravagli and C. Montague Weekley, executors of the Estate 
of Frieda Lawrence Ravagli. Reprinted by permission of the Viking Press, 
Inc. 

Excerpts from Sons and Lovers by D. H. Lawrence. Copyright © 191 3 by 
Thomas Seltzer, Inc. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of the 
Viking Press, Inc. 

Excerpts from Fantasia of the Unconscious by D. H. Lawrence. Copyright 
© 1922 by Thomas Seltzer, Inc., renewed 1950 by Frieda Lawrence. Re- 
printed by permission of the Viking Press, Inc. 

Excerpts from "The Fox" from The Portable D. H. Lawrence edited by 
Diana Trilling. Copyright © 1923 by Thomas B. Seltzer, Inc., renewed 
1951 by Frieda Lawrence. Reprinted by permission of the Viking Press, Inc. 

Excerpts from Aaron's Rod by D. H. Lawrence. Copyright © 1922 by 
Thomas Seltzer, Inc., renewed 1950 by Frieda Lawrence. All rights reserved. 
Reprinted by permission of the Viking Press, Inc. 

Excerpts from Lady Chatterley's Lover by D. H. Lawrence. Published 1932 
by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. 
Published in England by William Heineman, Ltd. Reprinted by permission 
of Laurence Pollinger, Ltd. and the Estate of the late Mrs. Frieda Lawrence. 

Excerpts from The Plumed Serpent by D. H. Lawrence. Copyright © 1926 
by Alfred A. Knopf. Copyright renewed 1953 by Frieda Lawrence Ravagli. 
Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf. Published in England by 
William Heineman, Ltd. Reprinted by permission of Laurence Pollinger, 
Ltd. and the Estate of the late Mrs. Frieda Lawrence. 

Excerpts from The Woman Who Rode Away by D. H. Lawrence. Copy- 
right ©1927 by D. H. Lawrence. Copyright renewed 1955 by Frieda Law- 
rence Ravagli. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A, Knopf. Published in 
England in The Complete Short Stories of D. H. Lawrence by William 
Heineman, Ltd. Reprinted by permission of Laurence Pollinger, Ltd. and 
the Estate of the late Frieda Lawrence. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



NORMAN MAILER 



381 



Excerpts from An American Dream by Norman Mailer. Copyright © 1964, 

1965 by Norman Mailer. Published by The Dial Press, Inc. Reprinted by 
permission of Dial Press, Inc., the author, and the author's agents, Scott 
Meredith Literary Agency, Inc, 

Excerpts from The Naked and the Dead by Norman Mailer. Copyright © 
1948 by Norman Mailer. Published by Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Re- 
printed by permission of the author and author's agents, Scott Meredith 
Literary Agency, Inc. 

Excerpts from Barbary Shore by Norman Mailer. Copyright © 1951 by 
Norman Mailer. Published by Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Reprinted by per- 
mission of the author and author's agents, Scott Meredith Literary Agency, 
Inc. 

Excerpts from The Presidential Papers by Norman Mailer. Copyright © 
1960, 1 96 1, 1962, 1963 by Norman Mailer. Published by G. P. Putnam's 
Sons. Reprinted by permission of the author and author's agents, Scott 
Meredith Literary Agency, Inc. 

Excerpts from Deaths for the Ladies and Other Disasters by Norman Mailer. 
Copyright © 1962 by Norman Mailer. Published by G. P. Putnam's Sons. 
Reprinted by permission of author and author's agents, Scott Meredith Lit- 
erary Agency, Inc. 

Excerpts from The Deer Park by Norman Mailer. Copyright © 1955 by 
Norman Mailer. Published by G. P. Putnam's Sons. Reprinted by permis- 
sion of author and author's agents, Scott Meredith Literary Agency, Inc. 

Excerpts from Why Are We in Vietnam? by Norman Mailer. Copyright 

1967 by Norman Mailer. Published by G. P. Putnam's Sons. Reprinted by 
permission of author and author's agents, Scott Meredith Literary Agency, 
Inc. 

Excerpts from Cannibals and Christians by Norman Mailer. Copyright © 

1966 by Norman Mailer. All rights reserved. First published by The Dial 
Press. Reprinted by permission of the author and author's agents, Scott 
Meredith Literary Agency, Inc. 

ERIK ERIKSON 

Excerpts from Identity, Youth and Crisis by Erik H. Erikson. Copyright © 

1968 by W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. Reprinted by permission of 
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 



3 8a SEXUAL POLITICS 



ORVILLE G. BRIM, JR. 

Table entitled 'Table of Traits Assigned to Male and Female" from the 
article "Family Structure and Sex Role" by Orville G. Brim, Jr., originally 
appearing in Socicmietry, Vol. 21, p. 7, 1958. Reprinted by permission of the 
American Sociological Association. Also appeared in Selected Studies in 
Marriage and the Family by Robert F. Winch, Robert McGinnis, and 
Herbert R. Barringer, 1962. Published by Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 

JEAN-PAUL SARTRE 

Excerpts from Saint Genet, Actor and Martyr by Jean-Paul Sartre, translated 
from the French Saint Genet, Comedien et Martyr by Bernard Frechtman. 
Copyright © 1952 by Librairie Gallimard. English translation copyright © 
1963 by George Braziller, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Resica Colin, Ltd. 
and George Braziller, Inc., Publisher. 

JEAN GENET 

Excerpts from The Thief's Journal by Jean Genet, 1964. Translated by 
Bernard Frechtman. Published by Grove Press, Inc. 

Excerpts from Our Lady of the Flowers by Jean Genet, 1963. Translated by 
Bernard Frechtman. Published by Grove Press, Inc. 

HENRY MILLER 

Excerpts from Sexus, The Rosy Crucifixion 1 by Henry Miller, 1965. Pub- 
lished by Grove Press, Inc. 

Excerpts from Black Spring by Henry Miller, 1963. Published by Grove 
Press, Inc. 



1 



Index 



Aaron's Rod (Lawrence), 138, 241 n., 

269-80, 281 
Abolitionist Movement, 39°., 66, 80-81, 

84 
Abortion, 44. 54, 164. i°6, 168 n., 172- 

73. '76 
Abraham, Karl, 182., 183 n. 
Abrahamsen, David, »68n. 
Acton, and feminine sexuality, 195 
Adam and Eve, 52-54. 181, 264 
Adams, Mildred, 72 n., 80 n., 82 n., 83 n., 

84 n. 
Adolescent Society, The (Coleman), 4 Sn. 
Adultery, 4, 8-9, 10, 12.2, 167, 168 n., 

266, 316, 3371 punishment for, 43 
Advertisements for Myself (Mailer), 317- 

18, 320 n., 323 n. 
Aeschylus, 1 12- 15 

Agamemnon (in The Furies'), 1 12-14 
"Age and Sex in the Social Structure of 

the United States" (Parsons), 222 n. 
Aggression (aggressiveness), 191 n., 193. 
204, 220, 230, 313 (see also Passivity; 
Sadism; Violence; Warfare); and sex 
roles, 31-32, 44, 62 
Albee, Edward, 342 
Alberti's Delia Famiglia, 74 
Algerian revolution, Genet and, 350, 354- 

61 
American Dream, An (Mailer), 10-16, 

318-19, 326, 328, 334 
Ancient City, The (Fustel de Coulanges), 

27 n. 
Ancient Law (Maine), roSn. 
Ancient Society (Morgan), 109 n., Ill, 

120 n. 
And the Poor Get Children (Rainwater), 

11911., 240 n., 341 n. 
Anthony, Susan B., 68 n., 69 n., 73 n., 80, 

81 
Anthropology (anthropologists), 27, 46- 

54, 108, 177-78. "4 
Anti-feminism, 83, 178 £E., 187 ff., 206 ff. 
(see also Counterrevolution; Feminist 
Movement; specific aspects; individu- 
als); Freudiarus m and, 178 ff., 1871!., 
206 ff. 



Anti-Semitism, 162, 163, 166, 278, 325 

Anti-Slavery conventions: (1837), 66; 
(1840), 80 

Apollo (in The Furies'), 113, 114 

A Prffpos Lady Chatterley's Lover (Law- 
rence), 240 n. 

Arabella (in Jude the Obscure), 130-33 

Arendt, Hannah, 26 

Aristocracy, 26, 121 

Aristotle, 38, 94 

Annand (in The Balcony), 352 

Armand (in Thief's Journal), 16-17, 18. 
20 

Armies of the Night, The (Mailer), 
314 n., 320 n., 32m., 323 n., 325 n. 

Arnold, Matthew, 148 

Art(s): homosexuality and, 341-42; 
women in, 43, 218 

Athena (in The Furies), 114, 115 

Authoritarian governments, 158-76. See 
also Nazi Germany; Soviet Union 

Autoeroticism. See Masturbation 

Baboons, study of by Erikson, 218-19 
Bachofen, J. J., Das Mutterrecht by, 

login., no-ii, 112, 115, 120 
Bacon, Margaret K., 223-28 
Balcony, The (Genet), 19, 20-22, 349, 

35>-53. 354, 356 
Baldwin, James, 327 n. 
Bales, R. F., 227 n., 229 
Barhary Shore (Mailer), 317, 319, 326 
Barringer, Herbert, 223 n. 
Barry, Herbert, 223-28 
Baumer, Gertrud, 159". 
Beauvoir, Simone de, 239, 271 
Bebel, August, 108 
Beck, Madame (in Villette), 141, 142, 

146 
Beigel, Hugo, 37 
Bell (Norman W.) and Vogel (Ezra F.), 

on the American family, 169 n. 
Belle Dame Sans Merci, La (Keats), 148 
Bernard, Jesse, 210 n. 
Betrayal, in Genet, 346 
Bible, the, 51, 52-53 



38 4 



SEXIML POLITICS 



Biology, and sexual politics, 26-33 (.see 
also Nature; specific aspects); Erikson 
and, 214-18; and female sexuality, 117- 
20, 169; Freud and, 180 ff.; function- 
alism and, 221, 222, 224-33 

Birkin, Rupert (in Women in Love), 262- 
69, 270, 274 

Birth control, 166, 322. See also Abor- 
tion; Contraception 

Bischoff and Harvard Project, 171 

Bisexuality, 191, 192, 196, 327 

Black Boy^ (Wright), 147 

Blacks (Negroes J, 39, 56, 83, 84 n., 1B0, 
30; n. (see also Abolitionist Movement; 
Civil Rights Movement; Racism); Genet 
and, 350, 352-62; and miscegenation, 
39 n. 

Blacks, The (Genet), 19, 287, 349, 353 ff. 

Black Spring (Miller), 8-9, 3040., 
307 n., 310 n., 313 n. 

Blackstone's Commentaries, 68 n. 

Blackstone's Laws of England, 68 n. 

BlackwelL Henry, 68-69, 80 

Blake, William, 14 

Blessed Damozel (Rossetti), 150 

Blow-Up (film), 52 

Blue Books, English Parliamentary, 70, 
87 n., 88 

Boccaccio, 45 

Bonaparte, Marie, 178, 204-6, 341 

Bonding instinct, Tiger on man's, 32, 49, 
210 

Botchako (in Miracle of the Rose), 340, 
342 

Brandeis, Louis, 88 

Brangwen family. See Rainbow, The 

Bretton, John Graham (in Villette), 
140-46 

Bridehead, Sue (in ]ttde the Obscure), 
I3C-34 

Brim, Orville G., Jr., 223, 228-33 

Bronfenbrenner, Urie, 169 n. 

Bronte, Charlotte, 130, 140-47 

Bronte, Emily, 147 

Brown, Daniel, 198 n. 

Browning, Robert, 99 n. 

Bryn Mawr College, 75 

Burns, W. L., 100 n. 

Burroughs, William, 46 

Bynner, Witter, 245-46 

Cancer, Mailer on suppressed violence and, 

331 
Cannibalism, Mailer on intercourse and, 

328—29 
Cannibals and Christians (Mailer), 

320 n., 323 a., 306 n., 329 n., 330 n., 

331 n., 334 n. 



Carlyle, Thomas, 93 

Caste system, patriarchal society and role 
of women, 36-393. See also Power; 
Status 

Castration complex, Freud's theory of, 
180 ff., 194, 200 

Catt, Carrie Chapman, 81, 84 n. 

Cause, The (Strachey), San. 

Century of Struggle (Flexner), 80. See 
also Flexner, Eleanor 

Chambers, Jessie, 254 

Chanson de geste, 50 

Chantal (in The Balcony"), 21-22, 352— 
53 

Chastity, 116, 122, 322 

Chatterley, Constance. See Lady Chat- 
terley's Lover 

Chernyshevsky, N. G., 108 n. 

Child, Irwin L., 223-28 

Childbirth (childbearing; child care), 47, 
109, 165-66, 167, 170, 172-76, 185, 
224 ff., 260, 322, 323, 328. See also 
Abortion; Children; Conception; Fam- 
ily; Motherhood; Pregnancy 

Childhood and Society (Erikson), 212 n. 

"Child Is Being Beaten, A" (Freud), 205 

Child labor, 86, 88 

Children (see also Childbirth; Child 
labor; Conditioning; Education; Family; 
Home; Motherhood; Socialization); in 
patriarchal society, 33, 56-57; psycho- 
analytic theory of sexuality and, 177 ff.; 
and sex role learning, 222-33; in Soviet 
Union, 168-76 

Chivalry, 38, 45 n., 66, 69, 73. 77, 85, 
88 ff., 97, loiff., 128, 134, 137, 148 ff., 
218-19 

Christianity, 150-51, 152, 156 (see also 
God; Religion); in Genet, 340, 344, 
345-47; in Lawrence, 282, 284 

Cipriano (in TJte Plumed Serpent), 283- 
84 

City in History, The (Mumford), 28 n. 

Civilization and Its Discontents (Freud), 
190 n., 200 n., 201-3 

Civil Rights Movement, 72 ff., 80 ff,, 82, 
84 n., 362 n. 

Class stratification (caste system), and 
patriarchal system, 36-392. See also 
Power; Status 

Cleaver, Eldridge, 325 n. 

Cleopatra, Rubens' painting of, 143—44 

Clitoris, female sexuality and, 117; psy- 
choanalytic theory and, 181, 184, 185, 
198-99, 204, 20; 

Clytemnestra (in The Furies), n 2- 14 

Coe, Richard N., 350 n. 

Co-education, 75, 76 



INDEX 



385 



Coitus, 32, 53 (see also Sexual inter- 
course); in literature, 292-93, 296- 
313, 318 ff., 324-35, 34i (see also spe- 
cific works, writers); orgasm frequency 
and female sexuality, 116-20; psycho- 
analytic theory and, 198-99, 2042. 

Coleman, James, 48 n. 

Collective system, Soviet, 168 ff. 

Colleges and universities, women's, 42, 
66 n., 74, 75. See also Education; 
Higher education; specific institutions 

Colonialism, 43, 56; Genet and, 354. 355f 
356 ff. 

Communism, 166, 168-76. See also Eng- 
els; Marx; Soviet Union 

Conception, 184. See also Abortion; 
Childbirth; Pregnancy; Reproduction; 
Motherhood 

Conditioning, ideology of sexual politics 
and, 26, 31, 96-98, 118-20 (see also 
Culture; Education; Socialization); 
Erikson and, 215-18; functionalism and, 
220-33; an d sexuality, 118-20 

Conditions of the Working Class (Engels), 
70 

Condoms, 166 

Conformity, patriarchy and sexual politics, 
32-33, 220, 222, 232. See also Condi- 
tioning; Socialization 

Congressional Union, 82 

Congress of Kiev (1932), 172 

Conrad, Joseph, 296 n. 

Contagious Diseases Acts (England, 
1860s), 71 

Contempt, sexual (see also Hostility; Mi- 
sogyny; Self-hatred); in Genet, 344, 
355. 356; in Miller, 300 ff., 3092. 

Contraception (contraceptive devices), 54, 
63, 164, 166, 168, 171, 172, 173-74. 
See also Abortion; Birth control 

Core gender identity, 29-30 

Cosmological Eye, The (Miller), 312 n. 

Counterrevolution, sexual, 157-233 (see 
also Anti-feminism; Sexual revolution); 
Erikson and, 210—20; functionalism 
and, 220-33; Genet and, 352, 359 ff.; 
Mailer and, 314-35, 362; reaction in 
authoritarian states, 157-76; reaction in 
ideology (psychoanalytic thought), 1 76- 
203 ff . 

Courtly love, 36-37, 45, 101, 125, 138, 
148, 150, 337-38 

Coverture principle, 67 

Crawley, Ernest, 48 n. 

Crime (criminality), women and double 
standard in, 56; Genet and, 337 ff. 

Crime and Punishment (Dostoyevslty), 15 



Criminal Procedures Act (England, 
1853), 100 n. 

Critch, Gerald. See Women in Love 

Croft, Sergeant (in Naked and the Dead), 
3I5-I7. 318, 319, 320, 321-22 

"Cross-Cultural Survey of Some Sex Dif- 
ferences in Sodalitation, A," 222-28 

Cruelty, sexual, 195-96, 300-13, See also 
Masochism; Sadism; Violence 

Cultural revolution, 362-63 

Culture, and sex roles (sexuality), 27, 28, 
3t, 46ff., 177, 211-18, 221 ff., 180 ff., 
187. See also Conditioning; Patriarchy; 
Socialization 

Cunt, use of term in Henry Miller, 299 ff., 
303, 307-8, 312-13 

Dale, Laeritia (in The Egoist), 137 
Dangerous Sex, the Myth of Feminine 

Evil, The (Hays), 46 n., 49 n. 
Dark Sun, A Study of D. H. Lawrence 

(Hough), 248 n. 
Darling (in Our Lady of Flowers), 340, 

346, 348-49 
Deaths For the Ladies and Other Disasters 

(Mailer), 325 n., 331 n. 
Deathwatch (Genet), 19, 338, 349 
Declaration of Independence, U. S., 81 
Decorum ethic, 85, 86 
Deer Park, The (Mailer), 315 n., 317-18, 

323, 326 
Defecation (excreta), Henry Miller on sex 

and, 309, 313 
Defloration, 48. See also Virginity 
Democracy (democratic society), 25 ff., 

64 ff., 126 (see niso Patriarchy); in 

Lawrence, 270, 282 
De Mott, Benjamin, 342 
Dennison, George, 342 
De Profundis (Wilde), 155 n. 
Deutsch, Helene, 182, 204, 206, 218 
Dickens, Charles, 89-90, 100 n., 333-34, 

34> 
Dictatorships, 158-76. See also specific 

countries 
Dielil, Guida, 163 n. 
Divine (in Our Lady of Flowers), 18-19, 

337. 344. 346-47, 348-49. 350 
Divorce, 34, 35 n., 67, 81, 85, 99, 101, 

133-34, 175-76 
Dixon, Mailene, 56, 57, 177 n. 
Doll's Bouse, A (Ibsen), 115, 152, 155- 

56 
Domi>ey and Son (Dickens), 89 
Domestics, women as, 87. See also Home, 

the 
Dominant Sex, The (Vaertung), 109 a. 



386 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Domination, sexual, 23 ff. (see also Power; 

specific aspects); defined, 25 
Dorian Gray (Wilde), 155 
Dostoyevsky, F., 15 
Double standard(s), 7, 38, 54, 56, 62, 

63, 89, 157, 167, 180, 208, 216, 256, 

266; and sexuality, 119a,, nan., 144, 

150 
Douglass, Frederick, 80 
Duriell, Lawrence, 294 

Economy (economic aspects), sexual poli- 
tics and, 225-26; (see also Employ- 
ment; Labor; Working women; specific 
aspects); and family and marriage, 
108 ff., i2off., r 57-76 passim; patri- 
archy and, 25, 38, 39-42. 64 ff-, 85-88, 
108 ff., 177, 225-26; and sexual revolu- 
tion and counterrevolution, 120 ff., 127, 
I57ff., 203 n., 225-26 

Eden legend, 52-54. See also Adam and 
Eve 

Education, 30-43, 65, 73~79. 1*7 (.see 
also Colleges and universities; Condi- 
ditioning; Higher education); Engels on 
children and, 126-27; Erikson and, 
218-19; functionalism and, 223, 225, 
227 ff.; Lawrence on, 261-62; Mill and 
Ruskin on women's, 91, 96-98; Soviet 
Union, 173-74; Woman's Movement 
and, 73-79 

Egoist, The (Meredith), 134-39. ^5° 

Eitel, Charles F. (in Deer Park), 318 

Eliot, George, 139, 155 

Eliot, T. $., 25, 177. 337 n- 

Ellis, Havelock, 336 n. 

Ellman, Mary, 329 

Emancipation of the American Women, 
The (Sinclair), 80 n. 

Emanuel, Paul (in Villette), 140, 141, 

134-44, 145, 146-47 
Emile or A Treatise on Education (Rous- 
seau), 74 n. 
Employment, women and, 82, 83, 84, 85- 
88, 158 n., 161, 162-63, 165-66, 
1 77 n. See also Economy; Factory work; 
Labor; Working women 
Endocrinology (hormones), 29—30 
Enfant Criminel, U (Genet), 349-50 
Engels, Friedrich, 64, 70, 89, 90; and pa- 
triarchal family and marriage theory, 
103, 108 ff., 115]!., 120-27, x 47, 169, 

I7S 
England. See Great Britain; Victorians, 

specific writers and their works 
English Novel; Form and Function, The 

(Van Ghent), 246 n. 
Enlightenment, the, 64, 65 



Entertainers, women as, 57 

Erikson, Erik, 210-20, 328 

Eros Denied (Young), 307 n. 

Esposito, Elena (in The Deer Park), 318, 

326 
Essays in Sociological Theory, 222 n. 
Eve (Biblical), 52-54, 181. See also 

Adam and Eve 
Everyday Questions (Trotsky), 170 
Everyone Was Brave (O'Neill), 82 n., 

177 n. 
"Expressive" (female) traits, 229-33 
Extended family, the, 225 

Factory work, women and, 70, 71-72, 85, 
87, 251, 260; in Nazi Germany, 161, 
162-63, 165 

Fall, the (Biblical), 51, 52-54. See also 
Adam and Eve 

Family, Socialization and Interaction Proc- 
ess (Talcott and Bales), 227 n., 229 n. 

Family, the, 177, 222, 225 s., 342 (see 
also Children; Home, the; Marriage; 
Motherhood; Wives); authoritarian 
states and, 177-79; change in character 
of, 62, 64, 67ff., 85, 87, 92 ff., 108-11, 
12c— 27; Freud and, 199, 201; in Genet, 
338, 342, 346; in Nazi Germany, 
I57ff.; origin and history of, 108-n, 
115 ff., 120 ff.; origin of term, 124; pa- 
triarchal, 27 n., 33-36, 108-nff., 120- 
27, 1 57 ff.; sexual counterrevolution 
and, 157 ff-; Soviet Union, 168-76'. 

Family, The (Goode), 33 n. 

Family and Democratic Society, The (Fol- 
som), i59n., 160 n., 161 n., 162 n., 
166 n., 167 n. 

"Family Structure and Sex Role Learning 
by Children" (Brim), 223 

Fanon, F, 359 

Fanshawe, Ginevra (in Villette'), 140, 
141, 146 

Fantasia of the Unconscious (Lawrence), 
251 

Fascism, 316. See also Fascist states 

Fascist states, 157-76 

Father, the, in patriarchal society, 33-36, 
87. See also Children; Family 

Faulkner, William, 16, 285, 296 n. 

Faye, Marion (in The Deer Pnrfe), 317- 
18 

Feder, Gottfried, 163 

Federation of German Women's Clubs, 
160 

Felicity (in The Blacks), 355-56 

"Female Orgasm and Sexual Inadequacy" 
(Brown), 198 n. 

Female Sexuality (Bonaparte), 204-6 



INDEX 



387 



Female Sexuality , , , (Deutsch), 182, 
204, 206 n., 218 

"Female Sexuality" (Freud), i84n., 
18911,, 191 n., 200 n., 203 n. 

Feminine Character . . . (Klein), I79n. 

Feminine Mystique, The (Friedan), 
177 n., 203 n. 

Femininity (see also Male-female; Mascu- 
line-feminine); in Genet, 18, 341, 349, 
35o, 353 

"Femininity" (Freud), 178 n., 179 n., 
184 n., 185 n., 186 n., 188 n., 190 n., 
191 n., 193 n., 194 n., 196 n., 197 n., 
200 n., 202 n. 

Feminist Movement (Feminism), 1 59 ff., 
260-62, 297 ff., 312, 362-63 (see also 
Anti-feminism; Counterrevolution; Sex- 
ual politics; Sexual revolution; Woman's 
Movement; specific aspects, individuals); 
collapse of, 157 s.; cultural revolution 
and, 362-63; feminism defined, 73-74; 
Freud and, 1 87 ff .; present status of, 
158 n., 262-63; recent attacks on, 
206—10 

Fertility cult, 28, 51, 52 

Feudalism, marriage in nineteenth cen- 
tury and, 68, 103-4, 105 n. 

Fiedler, Leslie, 329 n. 

Films (movies), homosexuality in, 337 

Fischer, Louis, 171 n. 

Flagellation, 205 

Flexner, Eleanor, 68 n., 69 n., 70 n., 71 n., 
72 n., 75 n., Son., 82 n., 830., 86 n. 

Flies, The (Sartre), 113 

Folsom, Joseph K., 33 n., 55 n., 159 n., 
160 n., 161 n., 162 n., 166 n., i67n. 

Food (earing) taboos, women and, 47-48 

Force, patriarchy and use of, 43-46 

Fox, The (film), 337 n. 

"Fox, The" (Lawrence), 265 

France, 65, 176; French Revolution, 65, 

74 

Famham, Marynia F., 206-9 

Frauenwerk (Nad organization), 160 

Frechtman, Bernard, 17 n., 19 n, 

Frelinghuysen, Senator (1867), 71 n. 

Freud, Ernest, 95 n. 

Freud, Sigmund, and Freudian psycho- 
analytic thought, 48 n., 95 n., 170, 
176-89, 190-203 ff., 218, 228, 341; in- 
fluence on sexual revolution of, 1 76-89, 
190-203 ff.; Lawrence and, 240, 241, 
246, 247, 248, 251, 252, 280, 285, 289 

Frick, Wilhelm, 163 

Friedan, Betty, i77n., 203n. 

Friendship, male, in Lawrence, 266, 
269 ff.; in Mailer, 335 

Frigidity, female, 193-94, 241, 246, 254; 



incidence and causes, 209, 270 n. 
Frigidity, male, in Lawrence, 270-71, 274, 

276 
Fuck (fucking), use of terms in Henry 

Miller, 296, 298, 299 ff., 304, 306, 

307 n., 310 
Fulford, Roger, 70 n., 82 n, 
"Funambulists, The" (Genet), 349 n. 
Functionalism, 220-33 
Funeral Rites (Genet), 346 n., 347 n. 
Furies, The (Eumenides; Aeschylus), 

112—15 
Fustel de Coulanges, Numa Denis, 27 n. 

Gage, Mathilda, 68 n., 69 n., 73 n. 

Gamett, Edward, 245-46 

Garrison, William Lloyd, 80, 81 n. 

Gehrke, Martha Marie, 162 n. 

Geiger, H, Kent, i69n., 170-71, 173 n. 

Gender, and sex, 29—31, 232. See also 
Male-female; Masculine-feminine; Sex 
roles 

Genet, Jean, 16-22, 44 n., 50 n., 154, 267, 
187, 330, 335, 336-6T, 362 

Genetics, 29-30 

Genitals, 52, 117 (see also Penis envy; 
Phallus; specific organs); female, atti- 
tude in patriarchal society toward, 47, 
51-52; female, slang for, 47, 299 ff,; 
and psychosexual personality, 30, 31; in 
psychoanalytic theory, 179 ff.; treatment 
in works of D. H. Lawrence, 239-40; 
treatment in works of Henry Miller, 
296 ff., 307-8 

Genius, Freudians on sex and, 188 

Germany. See Nazi Germany 

Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 108 n. 

Gleichshaltung (Nazi "bringing into line" 
policy), 160 

Goblin Market (Christina Rossetti), 
149 n. 

God (deity), 11, 25, 28, 51, 52, 151, 346. 
See also Christianity; Religion; Zeus 

Goebbels, Josef, 165 

Goldberg, Philip, 55 

Goode, William J., 33 n., 34 n., 36 n., 
39 n. 

Graham, Abbie, 81 n. 

Great Britain, 66-70 ff., 81 ff., 86, 89s., 
122. See also Victorians (Victorianism); 
specific writers and their works 

Greek literature and myths, 51-52, 112- 

15 
Grimes, Alan P., 83 n. 
Grimk£ sisters, 80 
Group marriage, 1 1 5 n,, 1 20 
Guevara, Che, 317 



388 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Guilt, and sexuality, 51-53, 54, 132, 152, 

153. J55, 171, 310, 323-24, 339- See 

also Self-hatred; Shame 
Guinevere (in Idylls of the King), 148 
Gustafson, Richard, 348 n. 

Hacker, Helen Mayer, 55 n., 56 n., 57 

Hulevy, Elie, 71 n. 

Hansbeny, Lorraine, 327 n. 

Hardy, Thomas, 130-34, 147, 357, 269 

Harris, Marvin, inn. 

Hassan, Ibn, on Henry Miller, 295 n. 

Hays, H. R., 46 n., 49 n. 

Herrschaft, 25, 269 

Hesiod, 51, 52 

Higher education, women and, 42-43, 
73-79, 227-28. See also Colleges and 
universities; Education 

Hip (Hipster period), Mailer and, 317, 
318, 319, 327 n. 

History (historical aspect), and sexual pol- 
itics, 27, 33, 46, 103 ff., 108-11 (see 
also specific aspects, events, individuals, 
movements); family and marriage, 108— 
11, 115 ff., 120 ff.; patriarchy, 27, 33, 
46, 103 ff., 108-11; sexual revolution, 
63 ff., 80 ff., 108 ff., 120 ff.; Woman's 
Movement, 80 ff., io8ff. 

History of Human Marriage, The (Wes- 
termarck), 108 n. 

History of Woman Suffrage, The (An- 
thony, Stanton, and Gage), 68 n., 69 n., 
73 n. 

Hitler, Adolf, 161, 162, 163-65, 166, 
317. See also Nazi Germany 

Home, the (domesticity; housework), 
women and, 39 n., 168 ff., X77, 226 
(see also Childbirth; Children; Family, 
the; Marriage); patriarchal society and 
sexual myths, 85, 98-108; sexual coun- 
terrevolution and, I57ff. 

Homicide. See Murder 

Homosexuality, 222 (see also Lesbianism); 
in literature, 13, 17-20, 50, 129, 151, 
"53-56, i58n., 173, 265 ff., 303, 317, 
321, 327, 330, 333-35, 336-61 passim, 
362 (see also specific writers and their 
works); in Nazi Germany, 167 

"Homosexual Villain, The" (Mailer), 334 

Homey, Karen, 204, 258 

Hostility, masculine, 45-46 (see also spe- 
cific aspects, e.g. Aggression; Misogyny; 
Power; Sadism); in Genet, 336 ff., 342, 
354 ff.; in Lawrence, 257 ff., 272 ff.; in 
Mailer, 324-35; in Miller, 296-313 

Hough, Graham, 248 n. 

Houghton, Walter, 89 n. 

House of Life (Rossetti), 1 50 



Humanite, L', 176 

Humanities, women's education in, 42-43 
Human Sexual Response (Brecher), 198 n. 
Humor, sexual, in Miller, 303 

Ibsen, Henrik J., 115, 129, 152, 155-56 
Ida (in Tennyson's TJie Princess), 77-79 
Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement, 

The (Kiaditor), 72 n., 82 n., 84 n. 
Idylls of the King, The (Tennyson), 

148-50 
Imprinting, psychosexual, 31 
Income (earnings) women's, 40, I77n. 
Industrialism, 242, 249-50, 26m., 267. 

See also Industrial revolution 
Industrial revolution, 65, 70, 85. See also 

Industrialism 
Inkeles, Alex, 169 n. 
"Instrumental" (Male) traits, 229-33 
Intellect (intelligence), feminine, I97ff., 

216 
Ionesco, The Lesson by, 253 
Irma (in TJie Balcony), 21, 22 
Israelites, and fertility cults, 52; and pa- 
triarchy, 34 n. See also Jews 

Japan, family, 1 58 n.; language, 55 n. 

Jealousy, female, Freud on, 188-89. See 
also Penis envy 

]ean Genet (Thody), 338 n. 

Jefferson, Thomas, 103 n, 

fenny (Rossetti), 150 

Jethroe, D. J. (in Why Are We in Viet- 
nam?), 319-20, 321-22, 326, 329, 
33 2 , 334, 335 

Jews (see also Israelites); anti-Semitism in 
Lawrence, 278; in Mailer, 16, 325; 
in Nazi Germany, 162, 163, 166 

Johnson (Virginia) and Masters (W. H.) 
sex studies, 117, ri8n. 

Jokanaan (in Doll's House), 152-56 

Jones, Ernest, 95 n., 178 n., i82n. 

Jones, LeRoi, 287 

Joyce, James, 285, 295, 296 n. 

)ude the Obscure (Hardy), 130-34 

Kadidja (in TJie Screens), 358, 359, 360 

Kagin, Jerome, 31 n. 

Kamm, Frances, 180 n. 

Kangaroo (Lawrence), 238, 241 n,, 280- 

83 
Karczewski versus Baltimore and Ohio 

Railroad, 3 5 n. 
Kazin, Alfred, 248 n. 
Keats, John, 148 
Keyserling, Mary Dublin, 40 n. 
Kiev, Congress of (1932), 172 



INDEX 



389 



Kinship, sexual politics in patriarchal so- 
ciety and, 33-36 . See also Family, the 

Kirkpatrick, Clifford, 159 n., 160, 166 n., 
i67n. 

Klein, Viola, 179, 183 

Komsomol (Soviet youth communes), 

173-74 
Koroliov, Dr., 172 

Kraditor, Aileen, 72 n., 82 n., 84, 158 n. 
Krassner, Paul, 328 

Labor, 225-26 (see also Economy; Em- 
ployment; Factory work; Industrialism; 
Working women; specific aspects); au- 
thoritarian states, 161, 162-63, 165-66, 
168 ff.; history of women and, 66, 69- 
71, 82, 83, 85-88 (see also Family, the; 
Home, the); patriarchal government and 
women's, 39-43 (see also specific coun- 
tries); Woman's Movement and, 82, 83, 
84, 85-88 
Ladies' Home Journal, 176 
Ladies in Revolt (Graham), 81 n. 
"Lady," use of term, 73, 85, 244 
Lady Chatterley's Lover (Lawrence), 

237-45, 248, 269, 281, 323 
LaFourcade, Georges, 151 n. 
Lange, Helene, 1 59 n. 
Language(s), status of women and rein- 
forcement in, 54-55, 229 
Lascivious, definition of and use in Henry 

Miller, 5-6 
La Touche, Rose, 90, 91, 97 n. 
Law. See Legislation 

Lawrence, D. H., x, 38 n,, 39 n., 209, 
237-93, 356, 362; Miller and, 296-97, 
311; Mailer and, 324, 334 
Lawrence, Frieda von Richthofen, 246 n., 

248, 265-66 n., 281 n. 
League of University Women (Germany), 

160 
League of Women Voters, 83 
Learning. See Conditioning; Colleges and 
universities; Culture; Education; Social- 
ization 
Leavis, F. R., 284, 286 n. 
Leclerc, Guy, 353 

Legislation (laws; legal system), and sex- 
ual politics, 27 n., 66-70, 84, 165-66; 
patriarchal society and, 27, 34, 43-46, 
56, 84, 99-100, 125, 126, 165-66, 172- 

73, 175 
Lenin, Nikolai, 168, 169—70 
Lesbianism, 336-37 n. 
Leslie, Kate (In The Plumed Serpent), 

283-85 
Lesson, The (Ionesco), 253 
Letters of D. H. Lawrence, 245-46 



Letters of Sigmund Freud, 95 n. 

Lewin, John, 1 1 3 n. 

Libido, Freud's theory of, 170 n., 185, 

l9°n-> I9 2 . 193-94, 202, 203, 204 
"Lilies" and "roses," Victorian sex imagery 

of, 148—50, 252, 254 
Lilly, Rawdon (in Aaron's Rod), 269-80 
Literature, sexual politics and, 3-22, 38- 
39, 46-54, 65, 76-80, 177, 237-93, 
194-313, 3M-35, 336-61 (see also 
specific writers and their works); and 
education for women, 76-80; in Genet, 
16-22, 336-61; in Lawrence, 237-93; 
in Mailer, 10-16, 314-35; in Miller, 
3-9, 294-3 1 3; instances of power and 
domination in, 3-22; Mill-Ruskin po- 
lemics, 88 ff.; misogyny and, 45-46, 57; 
patriarchy and myths about women in, 
46-54 (see also specific aspects, writers 
and their works); racism and, 38-39; 
and sexual revolution (women's rights), 
20—22, 65, 88-108 ff., 127-56 (see also 
specific aspects, writers and their works); 
women writers, 1 39 ff. (see also spe- 
cific writers and works) 
LoBta (Nabokov), 336 
London, Jack, 38 n. 
Lorenz, Konrad, 32, 210 n. 
Love, patriarchal society and, 36 ff., 50- 
51 ff. (see also Chivalry; Courtly love; 
Romantic love; specific aspects); in lit- 
erature, 269 ff., 283, 294-313, 315-35, 
336 ff. (see also specific aspects, writ- 
ers and their works) 
Love and Death in the American Novel 

(Fiedler), 329 n. 
Lowie, Robert, 168 n. 
Lundberg, Ferdinand, 206-9 
Lyon, Mary, 75 

Maccoby, Eleanor, 216 

McCumber, Senator, 72 

McGinnis, Robert, 223 n. 

Machismo, Mailer and, 317, 330, 335 

McLennon, John, 34 

Maids, TJie (Genet), 19, 349, 350-51, 

353, 354 

Mailer, Norman, 10-16, 38 n., 50 n., 129, 
238, 314-35, 337, 356, 362 

Maine, Sir Henry, 34, 108 n., H2n., H5n.. 

Makarenko, Anton S., 173 n., 17411. 

Male-female (differences and relation- 
ships), 24 ff. (see also Masculine- 
feminine; Sex roles; specific aspects);' 
biology, 36-33; ideology, 26; in liter- 
ature, 3-22, 46-54, 76-80, 237 ff. (see 
also Literature; specific writers and their 
works); patriarchal society and (see pa- 



39° 

Male-female (cont'd") 

triarchy); theory of sexual politics and, 
24 ff. (see also Sexual politics) 

Malinowski, Bronislaw, 35 

Mansfield, Katherine, 265 n. 

"Man Who Studied Yoga, The" CMailer), 
320 n. 

Marchetti On Our Lady of the Flowers), 

347 
Marcus, Steven, 7, 298 n., 300 n., 333 n., 

327 n. 

Marcuse, Herbert, 1580. 

Marriage, 39 n., 177, 208, 222, 342 (see- 
also Family, the; Home, the; Mother- 
hood); in literature, 131 ff., 146-47, 
264 ff., 285 (see also specific writers 
and works); monogamous, 111-12, 
115-30 ff., 189; patriarchal, 33, 34-36; 
polygyny, 119, 122, 225; and sexual 
revolution and counterrevolution, 62, 
66 ff., 85, 86, mff., 120 ff., i 57 ff. 
(see also specific aspects); Soviet Union, 
175-76; Victorian era, 62, 66 ff., 78-79, 
86, 99 ff. 

Marriage Loans CNazi Germany), 165-66 

Married Women's Property Act (Eng- 
land), 66 

Marx, Karl, and Marxism, 121, 124, 350. 
See also Communism; Engels, Friedrich; 
Soviet Union 

Masculine-feminine, 31-32, 62, 126 (see 
also Male-female; Sex roles; specific as- 
pects); Erikson and, 210-18; Freud and 
psychoanalytic thought, 176-2031?,; 
runctionalism and, 220-33; Genet and, 
336 ff., 340 ff., 349, 350, 353; Mailer 
and, 330-35; and personality (tempera- 
ment), 26-33 ( see l ^ so Temperament) 

Masculinity complex, Freud's theory of, 
186, 196 

Masochism, 129, 146, 151, 179, 191 n., 
194-97, zo3, 204-6, 212-13, 233> 239, 
288, 289, 325; in Genet, 341, 344, 351, 

353 
Mass Psychology of Fascism, The (Reich), 

158 n., 160, 164, 168 n. 
Masters (W. H.) and Johnson (Virginia) 

sex studies, 117, 118 n. 
Masturbation (autoeroticism), 323; Freud 

on, 181-86, 199 
Matriarchy (matriarchal society), 25 n., 

^8, 39, lOO-II, 112, l68 

Matrilineality, 25, 109 
Mead, Margaret, 224 n. 
Mei« Kampf, 164 
Melanesian men's houses, 49 
MeHors, Oliver. See Lady Chatterley's 
Lover 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



T 



Men in Groups (Tiger), 32 a. See also 

Bonding instinct 
Men's house culture, 48-50, 167; in 

Mailer, 315-35; in Miller, 302-4 
Menstruation, 47, 213, 218 
Meredith, George, 130, 134-39, «47 
Merlin (in Idylls of the King), 148-49 
Merton, Robert K., 39 n. 
Mettray children's prison, Genet in, 338, 

339, 34°, 349 
Miami and The Siege of Chicago 

(Mailer), 314 n., 325 n. 
Middle-march (Eliot), 139 
Middleton, Clara (in The Egoist), 134- 

39 
Mill, John S., 64, 66, 77, 81, 89-108, 

120, 139, 145, 147 
Miller, Henry, 3-9, 38 n„ 50 n., 238, 

240 n., 294-313, 324, 356 
Mills, C. Wright, 223 
Miracle of the Rose, The (Genet), 339 n., 

34° n., 342 n., 349, 35on. 
Misogyny, 182 n., 188; in literature, 45- 

46, 50, 51 ff., 57 
Modern Woman, The Lost Sex (Farnham 

and Lundberg), 206-9 
Modesty, female, Freud on, 188 
Money, John, 30-31 
Money, Miller and linking of sex to, 298, 

3" 
Monogamy, 111-12, n 5-20 ff., 189, See 

also Marriage 
Monroe, Marilyn, 326 n. 
Morel, Mrs. See Sons and Lovers 
Morel, Paul. See Sows and Lovers 
Morgan, Louis H., 109 n., no, r20 
Morxell, Lady Ottoline, 263 n. 
"Most Prevalent Form of Degradation in 

Erotic Life, The" (Freud), 197, 252 
Motherhood, 200, 208, 336 (see also 

Childbirth; Family, the; Home, the); 

Erikson on, 211-13, al 9J in Lawrence, 

249 ff., 274-75, 280; in Nazi Germany, 

161 ff., 167-68 
Mott, Lucretia, 80-81 
Mount Holyoke College, 66 n., 75 
Moynahan, Julian, 248 n., 25m., 254 n, 
Muller (Curt) versus State of Oregon, 

88 n. 
Muller-Lyer theory, 158 n. 
Mumford, Louis, 28 n. 
Murder (homicide; killing), literature and, 

11, 12, 15-16, 292-93, 310, 326, 335, 

337, 35i> 353, 359. See also Sadism; 

Violence; Warfare; specific writers and 

their works 
Murry, John Middleton, 265-66 n. 



INDEX 



39i 



Mutterecht, Das. See Bachofen, J. J., Dos 
Mutterecht by 

Myrdal, Gunnar, 55 n., 57 

Mystic Rose, The (Crawley), 48 n. 

Myths, sexual, 46-54, m-i5i in litera- 
ture (see Literature); and patriarchy, 
46-54, « n-20; sin and virtue, 22, 
51 ff.; woman's "nature," 92-108 

Nabokov, Vladimir, 336 

Naked and the Dead, The (Mailer), 315- 

17, 32°, 319, 33°, 332 
Narcissism, 179, 181, 194, 196-97, 203, 

205, 233, 3", 3 12 , 341, 356, 359 
National Labor Service Law (Nazi Ger- 
many), 161 
Native Son (Wright), 15-16 
"Nature," feminine, 71, 79. 9»- '° 8 < l6 9. 
192 n., 193-94, 198, 203 ff., 210 ff., 
221, 231-33 (see also Biology; Temper- 
ament); in literature, 241, 256, 285- 
93, 297-313, 339, 34o (»e « !s0 s P e " 
cific writers and their works) 

Nazi Germany (National Socialism) and 
Nazism, 50, 159-68, 317, 3*3 

Neff, Wanda, 70, 87 n. 

Negroes. See Abolitionist Movement; 
Blacks; Racism 

Newcomer, Mabel, 75 n. 

New Left, 317, 362 

"New Woman," in Lawrence, 268, 272, 

285 

Nexus (Miller), 299 n., 303 n., 3°4, 
305 n., 306, 311 

NicoUs, Mary, 135 

Nightwood, 337 

Nin, Anais, 312 n. 

Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitu- 
tion, 72 

"None of That" (Lawrence), 286 n. 

Nora Helmer (in A Doll's House), 115, 

15*, 155-56 _ 

Notes on a Dying Colonialism (Fanon), 

35? n - , „ „ 

Nuclear family, the, 158, 185, 225 

Oberlin College, 75 
Obscenity, Miller and, 2941!., 307-8 
"Ode to a Lady" (Mailer), 326 
Oedipus complex, 184, 185, 200, 203; 
Lawrence and, 245~57, 259-6°, 2 75> 
280 
"Of King's Treasuries" (Ruslcin), 92 n., 

96 n., 100 n. 
"Of Queen's Gardens" (Ruskin), 89-108, 

127 
Ommu (in The Screens), 360-61 
On Aggression (Lorenz), 210 n. 



O'Neill, William J„ 82 n., 177 n. 

On Liberty (Mill), 91 

"Oregon Brief," 88 

Orestes (in The Furies), n 2- 14 

Orgasm(s), female, frequency of, 116-19 
(see also Clitoris; Vaginal orgasm); 
Genet and, 341; Mailer and, 14, 3 22n -, 
324, 327-28; Miller and, 7, 298 

Original sin, 51-54 

Origin of the Family, Private Property, 
and the State, The (Engels), ioSff. 

Origins of Anthropological Theory (Har- 
ris), in n. 

O'Shaugnessy, Sergius (in "The Time of 
Her Time"), 3i4~ 1 5, 3 l8 - 3*9, 33*, 

334 
Other Victorians, The (Marcus), 298 n., 

300 n., 323 n., 327 n. 
Our Lady of the Flowers (Genet), 18-19, 

337 n., 340 n., 341, 344 "¦> 346-47, 

348-49 

Pacifism (non-violence), Mailer on, 321, 

332 
Packe, Michael St. John, 92 n. 
Pain, desire for, 195-96. See also Masoch- 
ism 
Painless childbirth, 47 
Pandora myth, 5i-5 2 > 53 
Pankhursts' "suffragettes," 82 
Papin, Christine and Lea, 351 
Pappritz, Anna, 162 
Parenthood. See Childbirth; Family, the; 

Marriage; Motherhood; Paternity 
Paret-GriEth prizefight, 33^-33 
Parsons, Talcott, 221, 227, 229 
Passivity, and sex roles, 3 1-32, 56, 62, 86, 
179, 190, 194, 203, 204-6, 2I5fl\, 
220, 233; Erikson and, 215 ft.; Freud 
and, 179, "9°, '94, =">3, 204-6; func- 
tionalism and, 220, 233; homosexual, 
Genet and, 339, 341; Lawrence and, 
240, 265, 288, 297 
Paternity, 112-15, J 20, 157- See also 
Childbirth; Family; Home; Marriage; 
Motherhood 
PatrttJ yotestes, Roman, 34 
Patriarchy (patriarchal society), and sex- 
ual politics, 24-58 ff-, 61 ff-, 108 ff., 
1578. (see also specific aspects); an- 
thropology (myth and religion), 46-54, 
inff.; authoritarianism and, 157-76; 
biology and, 26-33 ( se « also Biology); 
class stratification, 36-39; economic and 
educational aspects, 38, 39-43 C see a ^° 
Economy; Education); family and mar- 
riage and, 33-36, 108 ff. (see also Fam- 
ily; Marriage); force (legal systems) 



392 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Patriarchy (cont'd) 

and, 43-46; functionalism and, 220-33; 
history of, 27, 33, 46, 103 ff.; ideology, 
26, 54, 55, 176 ff.; literature and, 279, 
285, 313-35 -passim, 336 ff. (see also 
Literature; specific writers and their 
works); psychoanalytic thought and, 
I76ff.; psychology of, 54-58, 176 ff.; 
revolutionary theorists on, 108 ff.; sexual 
revolution and counterrevolution, 61 ff., 
108 ff., 158 ff., 176 ff. (see also specific 
aspects, e.g. Family; Freud, Sigmund; 
Marriage); sociology and, 33-36 

Patroclus and Achilles, 50 

Patterne, Sir Willoughby Chi The Egoist), 
134-39 

Paul, Alice, 82 

Penis. See Penis envy; Genitals; Phallus 

Penis envy, Freud's theory of, 179-89, 
190, 196, 197, 199, 200-1, 203, 208, 
211, 213, 228, 268, 348 

Personality. See Temperament (personal- 
ity) 

Petrarch, 4; 

Phallic period, Freud on, 181-82 ff., 190 

Phallus (phallic consciousness; phallic 
domination and supremacy), 28, ;o, 
117 (see also Genitals; Penis envy; Phal- 
lic period; Power and power relation- 
ships; Sex roles; specific aspects); atti- 
tudes in patriarchal society, 47, 49-50, 
53, 117; in literature, 23(1., 254, 
257 ff., 275, 280-93, 294-313. 320. 
325, 340 ff. (see also specific writers and 
their works) 

Physical strength (physiology), sex roles 
and, 27-28, 57-58, 88. See aho Biology 

Pill, birth control, 63 

Pimps (and faggots), in Genet, 17-20, 
338, 340, 342 

Plato's Republic, 74 

Plexus (Miller), 299 m. 

Plumed Serpent, The (Lawrence), 238, 
240, 241 n., 245, 281, 283-85 

Poems and Ballads (Swinburne), 151 

Poetry, sexual myths in, 76—79, 89, 90, 97, 
128-29, 147-52. See also specific poets 
and their works 

Politics, sexual, defined, 24-25. See also 
Power and power relationships; Sexual 
politics 

Polygyny, ug, 122, 225 

Pornography, 45, 46, 89, 155, 167, 288, 
290, 292 

Porter, Bern, 295 n. 

Portnoy's Complaint (Roth), 250 n., 32; 

Potential of Woman, 216 n. 

Power and power relationships (domina- 



tion; mastery), sexual, 103 (see aho 
Male-female; Sexual politics; specific as- 
pects); biological basis, 26-33 (see aho 
Biology; "Nature"; Temperament); edu- 
cation and, 42 (see also Education); 
ideological basis, 26; instances in litera- 
ture; 5-22 (see also Literature; specific 
writers and their works); patriarchal so- 
ciety and (see Patriarchy); and theory 
of sexual politics, 23-58 (see also Sex- 
ual politics) 

Power of Sexual Surrender (Robinson), 
206 n., 209 n. 

Praeterita (Ruskin), 93 n. 

Praz, Mario, 148 n. 

Pregnancy, 109, 172, 193, 211-13, 218. 
See alio Abortion; Childbirth; Contra- 
ception; Procreation 

"Prehistory and the Woman" (Mead), 
224 n. 

Presidential Papers, The (Mailer), 317 n,, 
32m., 322 n., 323 n., 328, 329 n., 330, 
332-33, 334 »•» 335 n- 

President's Report on the Status of 
Women, 177 n. 

Primitivism, cult of, in Lawrence, 289-93 

"Princess, The" (Lawrence), 2860. 

Princess, Tfte (Tennyson), 76-80 

Princeton Report to the Alumni on Co- 
Education, 42 n. 

Princeton University, Co-education and, 
42 n., 76 n. 

Procreation, r 72-76. See also Childbirth; 
Pregnancy; Motherhood; Reproduction 

"Professional Ideology of Social Patholo- 
gists, The" (MUls), 223 

Professions, women and, 39-43, 85, 162 

Promiscuity, nyn., 120, 122 n., 338, 342. 
See aho Adultery; Prostitution 

Property, concept of women as, 33, 34, 
36, 90 ff,, no, 120 ff. 

Property rights, woman and, 66-69, 8 J 

Prostitution, 62, 63, 71, 1 16-17, "9S-. 
122-23, 125, 157, 167, 274 (see aho 
Promiscuity; Whores); Engels on patri- 
archy and, 122-23; ™ literature, 106-7, 
127-28, 131, 274, 298, 301-2, 340, 
343. 352 (see also specific writers and 
their works); Victorian era, 106-7, 122- 
23 

Psychoanalytic thought, sexual revolution 
and, 176—2035., 240, 241, See also 
Freud, Sigmund, and Freudian psycho- 
analytic thought 

Psychology (psychologists), 222; Freud- 
ian, 176-203 (see also Fieud, Sig- 
mund); post-Freudian, 204 ff.; and 
women in patriarchal society, 54-58; 



INDEX 



393 



Psychology (cont'd) 

and woman's "nature," 92-108 (see aho 

"Nature"; Temperament) 
Psychology of Power, The (Samson), 

24 n. 
"Psychosexual Differentiation" (Money), 

30 n. 
Puritan Ethic and Woman Suffrage, The 

(Grimes), 83 n. 
Puritanism, in Miller, 305, 309 

Querelle of Brest (Genet), 341 n., 342-43 

Racism, 24, 38-39, 43, 83, 363 (see aho 
Blacks; Jews); analogy to women's sta- 
tus, 24, 36, 38, 39, 43, 56, 168; func- 
tionalism and, 220, 22i, 231; in Law- 
rence, 278, 281, 282, 283; in Mailer, 
12, 325, 328; in Miller, 3°5»' 

Radcliffe College, 7; 

Rahv, Philip, 300 n. 

Rainbow, The (Lawrence), 241 n., 257- 
62, 267 

Rainwater, Lee, 240, 341 

Ramon (in TJie Plumed Serpent), 283, 
284 

Rape, 184, 335; patriarchal society and, 
44; in Genet, 336, 338, 340, 353; in 
Lawrence, 286, 288 

Ratchford, Fannie, 147 n. 

Rationalism, 92, 93 

Reform Act of 1832 (England), 66 n. 

Reich, Wilhelm, i58n., i6on., 164, 166, 
168 n., 170 n., 172 n., 174 n., 322-23 

Religion, and women in patriarchal society, 
20-21, 26, 27 n., 28, 33, 46-54, 58, 
115, 177 (see aho Christianity; God); 
in Genet, 20-21, 340, 345-47 

Remember to Remember (Miller), 306 n., 
3'on. 

Renaissance period, 65, 66, 74 

Reproduction, 35, 164, 185, 187, 200. 
See also Childbirth; Pregnancy; Procre- 
ation 

Revolution, cultural, 362-63 

Revolution, Genet on oppression and, 353— 
61 

Revolution, sexual. See Sexual revolution 

Richard, Richard, 354 n. 

Richthofen, Frieda von. See Lawrence, 
Frieda von Richthofen 

Riesman, David, 37, 48 

Right to Be People, The (Adams), 72 n., 
80 n. 

Ring and The Book (Browning), 99 a. 

Robinson, Marie N., 206 n., 209 n. 

Roehm, Captain Ernst, 167 

Rogers, Katherine M., 45 n, 



Rogge-Bomer, Sophie, 162 

Rfiheim, Geza, 49-50, 53-54 

Rojack, Stephen (in An American Dream), 

10-16, 38 n,, 129, 318, 319, 322, 328, 

332, 334 
Roles. See Sex roles 
Roman family, the, 27, 34, 124 
Romantic Agony, The (Praz), 148 n. 
Romantic love, 36-37, 45, 125, 138, 296 

(see also Chivalry; Courtly love); in 

Genet, 336 ff. 
Room of One's Own, A (Woolf), 140 
Rose, Peter, 221 n. 
Rossetti, Christina, 149 n. 
Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, t28, 150, 152 
Rosy Crucifixion, The (Miller), 303 
Roth, Philip, Portnoy's Complaint by, 325 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 74 
Ruskin, John, 89-108, 127, 137, 139, 145 
Russell, Bertrand, t58n. 
Russia. See Soviet Union 
Ruta (in Am American Dream), n-15, 

328 

Sadism, 146, 253 (see aho Cruelty; Mas- 
ochism; Rape; Violence; Warfare); in 
Lawrence, 279, 285-93; in Mailer, 14, 
316 ff.; in Miller, t4, 300-13; and pa- 
triarchy, 44, 45-46, 5° 

Said (in The Screens), 357, 359, 360-61 

Saint Genet, Actor and Martyr (Sartre), 
17-18, 339 n., 341, 349, 353 

Sainthood (martyrdom), and criminals in 
Genet, 18, 344, 345, 349 

Salome (Wilde), 152-56 

Salvation, in Lawrence, 269-70; in 
Mailer, 334 

Samson, Ronald V., 24 n. 

Samurai order, 43, 49 

Sartre, Jean-Paul, TJie Flies by, 113; on 
Genet, 17-18, 113, 339, 341, 349, 353 

Saturday Review, The, 75 n. 

Schlesinger, Rudolph, i68n., 171 n. 

Schmidt, Vera, 173 

Schneiderman, Rose, 69-70 

Scholtz-Klink, Gertrud, 165 

Schurtz, Heinrich, 49 

Science, women and education in, 42-43 

Science(s), and sexual attitudes, 26-33, 
177-78. See aho specific sciences 

Scott, Walter, 101 

Screens, The (Genet), 19, 50, 349, 351, 
356-61 

Seek (in Our Lady of Flowers), 346-47 

Second Sex, Tfie (Beauvoir), 239 

Segregation, sexual, 47, 48 ff. 

Selected Studies in Marriage and Family, 
223 



394 



SEXUAL POLITICS 



Self-hatred, in Genet, 18, 354, 355, 357 

Seneca Falls, New York, meeting (1848), 
66, 80-81; "Statement of Sentiments," 
81 

Servants, Genet on, 337, 350-51 

Sesame and Lilies (Ruskin), 89 n., 90, 91, 
96 n., 97 n., 100 n. 

Sex (sexuality), 20-22, 23 ff., 51 ff, 62 ff, 
89-108 ff., 115-120 ff., 127-56, 157 ft. 
(see also Sex roles; Sexual attitudes; 
Sexual intercourse; Sexual politics; Sex- 
ual revolution; specific aspects); counter- 
revolution and, 157 ff.; in literature, 3- 
22 (see also literature); in Soviet Un- 
ion, 168-76; patriarchy and, 115-201!. 
(see also Patriarchy); psychoanalytic 
theories of, 176-203 ff. 

Sex, Culture and Myth (Malinowski), 
35 n. 

Sex and Gender (Stoller), 29 n. 

Sex Game (Bernard), 210 n. 

Sexism, analogy to racism of, 39. See also 
Racism 

Sexistentialism, Mailer and, 326-27 

Sex roles (sex identity), 363 (see also 
Male-female; Masounie-feminine; Sex- 
ual attitudes; specific aspects); Erikson 
on, 210-18; Freudian and post-Freudian 
psychology on, 177 ff.; functionalism on, 
220-33; in literature, 17-20 (see also 
Literature; specific writers and their 
works); sexual politics and, 26-58 (see 
also Sexual politics); sexual revolution 
and, 62 ff., 92 ff. (see also Sexual revo- 
lution); and status, 24 ff. (see also Sta- 
tus) 

Sex symbols, women as, 144 

Sexton, Patricia, 330 n. 

Sexual attitudes, 20-22, 61 ff., 89 ff., 
115 ff, 127-56 (see also Male-female; 
Masculine-feminine; Sexual politics, Sex 
roles); authoritarian, 157-76; Erikson 
on, 210-18; Freudian psychology and, 
176-2038.; functionalism and, 220-33; 
literature and, 5-22, 2378. (see also 
Literature; specific writers and their 
works); patriarchy and, 45-46, 48-58, 
61 ff., 1 1 5-20 ff. (see also Patriarchy); 
and status, 24 ff. (see also Status) 

Sexual intercourse (see also Coitus; Geni- 
tals; Orgasm[s]; Sex [sexuality]; Sexual 
attitudes; Vaginal orgasm); power and 
domination attitudes and description in 
literature of, 3-22, 341 (see also Litera- 
ture; Power; specific terms, writers and 
their works); theory of sexual politics 
and, 23 ff, 51 ff. (see also Sexual pol- 
itics) 


Praised and denounced when it was first published in 1970, Sexual Politics not 
only explored history but also became part of it. Kate Milieu's groundbreaking 
book fueled feminisms second wave, giving voice to the anger of a generation 
white documenting the inequities — neatly packaged in revered works of literature 
and art — of a complacent and unrepentant society. 



Sexual Politics laid the foundation for subsequent feminist scholarship by showing 
how cultural discourse reflects a systematized subjugation and exploitation of 
women. Milieu demonstrates in detail how patriarchy's attitudes and systems pene- 
trate literature, philosophy, psychology, and politics. Her incendiary work rocked 
the foundations of the literary canon by castigating time-honored classics — from 
D. H. Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover to Norman Mailer's The Naked and the 
Dead — for their use of sex to degrade and undermine women. 

A new introduction to this edition draws attention to some of the forms patri- 
archy has taken recently in consolidating its oppressive and dangerous control. 
